

Glossary
Ah¯adith: Plural of Hadith, traditions of the holy Prophet of Islam describing his utterances, actions,
instructions and actions of others (Companions) tacitly approved by him.
‘Ahd: Generally, a unilateral promise or an undertaking, although sometimes it also covers a bilateral
obligation.
‘Ain: Determinate property; property that is not Dayn; generally the commodities of material value in
themselves; plural ‘Aay ¯an.
Ajr al-Mithl : Rent or wage to be decided by a judge or arbitrator.
Ajr al-Musammah : Agreed rent or wage in Ijarah or Ujrah contracts.
Akhl¯aq: Matters for disciplining one’s self regarding relationships with others.
Al-Ajr: Commission, fees or wages charged for services rendered or work done.
Al Ghunm bil Ghurm : Earning profit is legitimized only by risk-sharing and engaging in an economic
venture. This provides the rationale and the principle of profit-sharing in Shirkah arrangements. Al
Kharaj bil Daman has similar meaning: one can claim profit only if one is ready to take liability – to
bear the business risk, if any.
Al-Hisbah: The institution of ombudsman, a social regulatory body empowered to check imbalances
in the market for the purpose of re-establishing a better semblance of market-driven exchanges in the
light of the principles of justice.
Al K ¯ali bil K ¯ali: Exchange of two things, both delayed, or exchange of delayed counter value for
another delayed counter value – also termed Bai‘ al-Dayn bid-Dayn.
Al-Sarf: Sale of monetary value for monetary value – currency exchange. In Islamic law such exchange
is regarded as “sale of price for price”, and each price is a consideration of the other; has to be
simultaneously paid.
Al-Wadi‘ah: A basis for safe-keeping of deposits (Am ¯anah) on which no profit can be sought.
Am¯anah: Refers to deposit in trust. A person can hold a property in trust for another, sometimes by
express contract and sometimes by implication of a contract. It entails the absence of liability for loss,
except in breach of duty. Current accounts are regarded as Am ¯abnah. If the bank gets authority to
use current account funds in its business, Am ¯anah transforms into a loan. As every loan has to be
repaid, banks are liable to repay the full amounts of the current accounts, irrespective of their loss or
profit.



486 Understanding Islamic Finance
Ameen: Trustworthy, trustee – safeguarding others’ entrusted property as if it was his own; not liable
in case of any damage to the trust property without any negligence on his part.
Aq¯aid: Matters of belief and worship – rituals pertaining to the relationship between man and God.
‘Aqd: Lexically, conjunction or to tie; legally, synonymous with the word “contract” in modern law.
´Aqd Batil : A void or invalid contract – one which does not fulfil the conditions relating to offer
and acceptance, subject matter or the consideration and possession or delivery of the subject matter or
involves some illegal external attributes like the involvement of Riba, Gharar or Qimar.
´Aqd Ghair L ¯azim: A contract in which any of the parties has a right to revoke it without the consent
of the other.
´Aqd L ¯azim: A contract in which none of the parties has a unilateral right to revoke (without the
consent of the other).
‘ ¯Aqilah: Kin or persons of relationship who share any responsibility.
‘Arb ¯un: Downpayment; an amount taken from the buyer as part of the price after execution of the
sale agreement; the seller has the option to confiscate it if the buyer backs out and does not complete
the purchase process.
‘ ¯Ariyah: Gratuitous loan of objects. It means the loan of a particular piece of property, the sub-
stance of which is not consumed by its use, without anything taken in exchange. In other words,
it is the gift of usufruct of a commodity that is not consumed on use. It is different from
Qard, which is the loan of fungible objects which are consumed on use and in which the sim-
ilar and not the same commodity has to be returned. It is also a virtuous act like Qard. The
borrowed commodity is treated as a liability of the borrower, who is bound to return it to its
owner.
Athman: Plural of Thaman – monetary units – medium of exchange used for payment of prices and
liabilities.
Bai‘al‘Arb ¯un: A sale of downpayment with the condition that if the buyer takes the commodity, the
downpayment will become part of the selling price and if he does not purchase the commodity, the
advance money will be forfeited.
Bai‘ al Dayn : Sale of debt or debt instruments.
Bai‘ al-Gh ¯aib: Sale of absent or concealed goods (without knowing their features/specifications).
Bai‘ al Hasat : Sale where the subject matter depends on the fall of a stone or pebble; prohibited due
to Gharar.
Bai‘ al ‘Inah : Double sale by which the borrower and the lender sell and then resell an object between
them, once for cash and then for a higher price on credit, with the net result of a loan with interest –
prohibited.
Bai‘ al Khiyar : Sale with an option of one party to rescind the contract within a specified time.
Bai‘ al-Majh ¯ul: A sale in which the object of sale or its price or the time of payment remains unknown
and unspecified – lacking any material information.
Bai‘ al Mu‘allaq : Suspended sal e – a sale transaction, the effectiveness of which is related to any
future condition or action.
Bai‘ al Sarf : Sale of gold, silver or other monetary units on both sides.
Bai‘ Batil : Invalid sale – having no effect in respect of rights and liabilities of the parties.



Glossary 487
Bai‘ bil Wafa : Sale with a right of the seller to repurchase (redeem) the property by refunding the
purchase price – basically a pledge; treats the sold asset as collateral until the amount is paid back
by the other party to sale; not permissible if the resale of the property to the original seller is made a
condition for the initial sale.
Bai‘ Mu´ajjal: Literally, a credit sale. Technically, a financing technique adopted by Islamic banks; it
is a contract in which the seller allows the buyer to pay the price of a commodity at a future date in a
lump sum or in instalments. The price fixed for the commodity in such a transaction can be the same
as the spot price or higher or lower than the spot price, but generally it is higher than the spot price.
Bai‘ Murabaha: Sale at cost price plus a mutually agreed profit – bargaining on profit margin on the
cost price. (See Murabaha)
Bai‘ Musawamah : Sale without any reference to the cost price to the seller – bargaining on price.
Bai‘ Salam : A contract in which advance payment is made for goods to be delivered later on. The
seller undertakes to supply some specific goods to the buyer at a future date in exchange of an advance
price fully paid at the time of the contract. According to normal rules of the Shar ¯ı´ah, no sale can
be executed unless the goods are in existence at the time of the bargain, but Salam sale forms an
exception given by the holy Prophet himself to the general rule, provided the goods and their prices
are defined and the date of delivery is fixed. It is necessary that the quality of the commodity intended
to be purchased is fully specified, leaving no ambiguity leading to dispute. The objects of this sale
are goods and not media of exchange like gold, silver or currencies, because these are regarded as
monetary values, the exchange of which is covered under the rules of Bai‘ al Sarf, i.e. hand to hand
without delay. Barring this, Bai‘ Salam covers almost everything which is capable of being definitely
described as to quantity, quality and workmanship, subject to the fulfilment of other conditions for
valid Salam.
Bai‘ Tawliyah : Sale at cost price – to facilitate or serve others.
Bai‘ Wadhi‘ah : Sale with loss – at a price less than the cost price.
Bai‘ wal Salaf : A conditional contract combining selling and lending, like one man saying to another:
“I purchase your goods for such and such if you lend me such and such” – invalid.
Barn¯amaj: Catalogue or list of contents in a sale consignment.
Bayt al M ¯al: Public treasury of an Islamic State.
Buyoo‘al Am ¯an¯at: Fiduciary sales like Murabaha, Tawliyah and Wadhi‘ah.
Dayn: Debt; goods of indeterminate category that can be used for payment of liabilities; a liability
to pay which results from any credit transaction like purchase/sale on credit or due rentals in Ijarah
(leasing). A Dayn comes into existence as a result of any other contract or credit transaction.
Dham¯an: Taking liability, responsibility – contract of guarantee; responsibility of
entrepreneur/manager of a business.
Dham¯an Khatr al-Tariq : An arrangement of mutual assistance in which losses suffered by traders
during journeys due to hazards on trade routes were indemnified from jointly pooled funds.
Dinar: Currency in the form of gold coins that was prevalent in the past.
Dirham: Currency in the form of silver coins prevalent in the past.
Falah: Welfare in this world and the Hereafter; Falah means to thrive, to become happy or to have
luck and success. Technically, it implies success both in this world and in the Akhirah (Hereafter).
The Falah presumes belief in one God, the apostlehood of Prophet Muhammad (pbuh), Akhirah and
conformity to the Shar ¯ı´ah in behaviour.



488 Understanding Islamic Finance
F¯asid: A voidable or defective contract (according to division of contracts with respect to legality as
per Hanafi Fiqh) due to nonfulfilment of any condition required for valid contracts.
Fatwah: A religious decree or edict; plural Fat ¯awa.
Fiqh: Islamic jurisprudence; the science of the Shar ¯ı´ah. It is an important source of Islamic tenets.
Fr¯aidh: Obligations – acts that are obligatory for Muslims.
Fuduli: A person who is neither guardian nor agent, or if he is agent, he transgresses the limits
prescribed by the principal in respect of a contract.
Fulus: Coins of inferior metals.
Ghaban: Misappropriation or defrauding others in respect of specifications of the goods and their
prices.
Ghaban-e-Fahish: Excessive profiteering with deceptio n – a person sells a commodity stating explic-
itly or giving the impression that he is charging the market price, but actually he is charging an
exorbitant price taking benefit of the ignorance of the purchaser – in such cases the purchaser has the
option to revoke the sale and get back the price paid (see Khiyar-e-Ghaban).
Gharar: Literally, uncertainty, hazard, risk relating to major elements of a contract; technically, sale
of a thing which is not present at hand, or the sale of a thing whose consequence or outcome is not
known, or a sale in which one does not know whether it will come to be or not, such as fish in water
or a bird in the air. It refers to an element of absolute or excessive uncertainty in any business or
a contract about the subject of contract or its price, or mere speculative risk. It leads to undue loss
to a party and unjustified enrichment of another, which is prohibited. Gambling is a form of Gharar
because the gambler is ignorant of the result of the gamble. Selling goods without allowing the buyer
to properly examine the goods is also a kind of Gharar. Some examples of Gharar are: selling goods
that the seller is unable to deliver; selling known or unknown goods against an unknown price, such as
selling the contents of a sealed box without exact information about its contents; selling goods without
proper description; selling goods without specifying the price, such as selling at the “going price”.
Gh¯armeen: One head of the Zakat beneficiaries – broadly, those who are obliged to pay others’ debts
as sureties. An Islamic State can make up their loss by paying from Zakat proceeds.
Gh¯asib: Usurper of property of others.
Habal-al-Hablah: Sale of what is in the womb of an animal; a sale where its subject matter is not
clearly known – prohibited due to Gharar.
Halal: Anything permitted by the Shar ¯ı´ah; permissible goods, valid earnings, etc.
Hamish Jiddiyah : The margin reflecting firm intention of the promisee – earnest money taken from
a person who intends to purchase a commodity from or enters into a contract with anyone to confirm
his sincerity to actually purchase the commodity when offered. In the case of breach of promise, the
promisee has the right to recover his actual loss incurred due to the breach.
Haram: Anything prohibited by the Shar ¯ı´ah.
Hawalah: Literally, transfer; legally, an agreement by which a debtor is freed from a debt by another
becoming responsible for it, or the transfer of a claim of a debt by shifting the responsibility from one
person to another – contract of assignment of debt. It also refers to the document by which the transfer
takes place, like a bill of exchange, promissory note, cheque or draft.
Hibah: Gift – to give something in permanent ownership to another without any consideration in
exchange.
Hilah, Hiyal (plural): Ruses, tricks used in transactions to circumvent the basic prohibitions.



Glossary 489
Hukmi (Qabza) : Constructive possession; a situation in which the buyer has not taken the physical
delivery of the commodity, yet the commodity has come into his risk and control and all the rights
and liabilities are passed on to him, including the risk of its destruction.
Husnal Qadha : Gracious payment of loan/debt: repaying a loan in excess of the principal without a
precondition; individuals’ discretion; not to be adopted as a system in which a creditor, lender or an
investor has expectation of getting some reward on the debt.
Ib¯ad¯at: Plural of Ib ¯adah, meaning worship or a ritual act.
Ib¯ahatul Asliyah : General permissibility, which means that all economic activities that are not pro-
hibited by the original sources of Shar ¯ı´ah, i.e. the Qur ¯an and Sunnah, are valid/permissible.
Ijab: Offer, in a contract (see also Qabul).
Ijarah: Letting on lease. Sale of defined usufruct of any asset for a defined period in exchange of
definite rent; only those assets can be leased the corpus of which is not consumed with use or the
form/shape of which is not entirely changed with use. For example, cotton, yarn, fuel, milk, money
can be sold/bought, but not leased against rentals. This is because the lessor has to bear the risk related
to the ownership of the asset, and this is possible only if the leased asset remains intact and the lessor
gets reward in the form of rental against taking risk.
Ijarah Mosufah bil Zimmah : A lease contract where the lessor undertakes to provide a well-defined
service or benefit without identifying any particular units of asset rendering the related service. If a
unit of the asset is destroyed, the contract is not terminated and the lessor provides another such unit.
Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek : Lease culminating in the transfer of ownership to the lessee in such a
way that lease and sale are kept separate and independent transactions. Use of this term for Islamic
leasing is better than Ijarah-wal-Iqtina‘, as the latter tends to give the impression that Ijarah and sale
are working side by side, while actually they have to be two separate deals.
Ijarah-wal-Iqtina‘: A mode of financing by way of hire–purchase, adopted by Islamic banks but
different from conventional hire–purchase. It is a contract under which an Islamic bank purchases
equipment, buildings, etc., giving them on lease against agreed rentals together with a unilateral
undertaking that at the end of the lease period, the ownership in the asset will be transferred to the
lessee. The underlying contract is Ijarah and all rules applicable to Ijarah have to be observed to make
the deal Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant. The undertaking or the promise does not become an integral part of the
lease contract to make it conditional. Ownership is transferred through a separate contract of sale or
gift. Another term used for this is Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek.
Ijma‘a: Consensus – decision or resolution of generality of the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars of any time pertaining
to any matters relating to Shar ¯ı´ah. Ijma‘a of the Companions of the holy Prophet is considered by the
overwhelming majority of Muslims as part of the Sunnah and an important source for the derivation
of laws in the subsequent periods.
Ijtihad: An endeavor of a qualified jurist to derive or formulate a rule of law to determine the true
ruling of the divine law in a matter on which the revelation is not explicit or certain, on the basis of
Nass or evidence found in the Holy Qur’ ¯an and the Sunnah. Express injunctions have no room for
Ijtihad. Implied injunctions can be interpreted in different ways by way of inference from the accepted
principles of the Shar ¯ı´ah.
‘Illah: The attribute of an exchange or event that entails a particular Divine ruling for cases possessing
that attribute – cause of prohibition of specific exchange contracts. ‘Illah is the basis for applying
analogy for determining permissibility or otherwise of any transaction.
Imam: Leader, guide or ruler.
Iman: Faith, belief.



490 Understanding Islamic Finance
‘In¯an (a type of Shirkah): A form of partnership in which each partner contributes capital and has a
right to work for the business, not necessarily equally.
Isr¯af: Immoderateness, exaggeration in spending wealth and waste, covers spending on objects
which are permissible otherwise, spending on superfluous objects, spending on objects which are not
needed and are incompatible with the economic standard of the majority of the population (see also
Tabzir).
Istihsan: A doctrine of Islamic law that allows exception to strict legal reasoning in special circum-
stances when considerations of human welfare so demand.
Istij¯ar: Hiring, renting – another term less frequently used for Ijarah.
Istijrar: Repeat sale/a continuous purchase or supply contract – an agreement between a buyer and
a supplier whereby the latter agrees to supply a particular product on an ongoing basis, for example
monthly, at an agreed price and on the basis of an agreed mode of payment.
Istisna‘a: Order to manufacture (for purchase). It is a contractual agreement for manufacturing goods
and commodities, allowing cash payment in advance and future delivery or future payment and future
delivery. Istisna‘a can be used for providing the facility of financing the manufacture/construction of
houses, plant, projects, bridges, roads and highways.
‘Iwad: Recompense or equivalent counter value in an exchange.
Jahl or Jahala: Ignorance, lack of knowledge; indefiniteness in a contract, non-clarity about the parties
or their rights and obligations, the goods/subject matter or the price/consideration – leading to Gharar.
Ju‘alah or Ji‘alah : Rendering a service against reward; literally, wages, pay, stipend or reward for
a job. Legally, it refers to doing any job or providing any service for achieving an objective which
is not sure to be achieved for someone against a prize, fee or commission. Achievement of the end
result is necessary for entitlement to the fee or prize. The determination of the required end result of
the transaction is considered to be sufficient to make it permissible. Ju‘alah is a relevant and useful
transaction in events that cannot be accomplished through Ijarah, such as bringing back lost property
from an uncertain location, because an Ijarah contract requires that the work and the wage must be
known and specified without any hazard.
Kafalah: Guarantee; literally, Kafalah means responsibility, amenability or suretyship, legally, in
Kafalah, a third party becomes surety for the payment of debt. It is a covenant/pledge given to a
creditor that the debtor will pay the debt or any other liability.
Khalabah: Misleading marketing – pursuing unaware and simple clients by overprojecting the quality
of a commodity.
Kharaj bi-al-Daman: Gain accompanies liability for loss; a Hadith forming a legal maxim and a basic
principle of Islamic finance (see also Al-Ghunm bil Ghurm).
Khatar: A kind of Gharar – Khatar will be involved if liability of any of the parties to a contract is
uncertain or contingent, delivery of one of the exchange items is not in the control of any party or the
payment from one side is uncertain.
Khiy¯ar: Option or a power to annul or cancel a contract.
Khiyar al ‘Aib : Option of defect – goods can be returned if found defective – option automatically
available to the buyer.
Khiyar al-Majlis: Option for the contracting session; the power to annul a contract possessed by both
contracting parties as long as they do not separate.
Khiyar al Ro’yat : Option to revoke a sale contract to be exercised on seeing the goods.



Glossary 491
Khiyar al-Shart : A right, stipulated by one or both of the parties to a contract, to cancel the contract
for any reason within a fixed period of time.
Khiyar al Wasf : Option of quality – where goods are sold by specified quality, if that quality is
absent, the goods can be returned.
Khiyar-e-Ghaban: Option relating to price – where goods are sold at a price far higher than the
market price, and the client is told or given the impression that he has been charged the market price.
Khiyar-e-Naqad: Option of payment – to agree that if payment is not made within (three) days, the
contract will be annulled.
Ma‘lum: Known – in the knowledge of the parties.
Mabi‘: Subject of sale – the commodity that is being traded in a transaction.
Maisir: An ancient Arabian game of chance played with arrows without heads and feathering, for
stakes of slaughtered and quartered camels. It refers to all types of hazard and gambling – acquisition of
wealth by chance/easily (without paying an equivalent compensation (‘Iwad) for it or without working
for it, or without undertaking any liability against it).
M¯al: Anything that can be possessed; includes money such as gold, silver and monetary units,
commodities such as clothes and foodstuffs and immovable properties such as houses and factories.
M¯al-e-Mutaqawam: Things the use of which is lawful under the Shar ¯ı´ah, or wealth that has a
commercial value. Legal tenders of the modern age that carry monetary value are included in M ¯al-e-
Mutaqawam. It is possible that certain wealth has no commercial value for Muslims (non-Mutaqawam)
but is valuable for non-Muslims. Examples are wine and pork.
Maslaha-e-Mursalah: The aspect of general welfare/benefit of mankind/society that is kept in mind
by the scholars competent to undertake Ijtihad while resolving issues confronted from time to time.
Catering to the well-being of people in the worldly life and also in the Hereafter or relieving them of
hardships is the basic objective of the Shar ¯ı´ah.
Maw¯al¯at: A contract in ancient Arabia in which one party agreed to bequeath his property to the other
on the understanding that the benefactor would pay any blood money that may eventually be due by
the former.
Mawquf: A contract, the effectiveness of which is suspended until any happening.
Mith¯aq: A covenant; refers to an earnest and firm determination on the part of the concerned parties
to fulfil the contractual obligations; has more sanctity than the ordinary contracts.
Mithlam-bi-mithlin: Like for like (in exchange transactions).
Mithli: Fungible goods; goods all units of which are the same and that can be returned in kind, i.e.
gold, silver, wheat, all currencies, etc.
Mu‘¯amal¯at: All kinds of economic activities related to exchange of goods and services.
Mua‘awamah: Sale for years – e.g. fruit of a tree or an orchard sold for more than one year to come
without stipulating the amount, price or time of delivery – prohibited.
Mub¯ah: Object that is lawful (i.e. something which is permissible to use or trade in).
Mudarabah: A form of partnership where one party provides the funds while the other provides
expertise and management. The latter is referred to as the Mudarib. Any profits accrued are shared
between the two parties on a pre-agreed basis, while any loss is borne by the provider of the capital.
Mudarib: In a Mudarabah contract, the person or party who acts as entrepreneur.



492 Understanding Islamic Finance
Muflis: Destitute; insolvent/bankrupt debtors.
Mugh¯arasah: Joint venture projects involving plantation of gardens and sharing the produce.
Mulamasah: Sale by touching the subject matter or its carton without knowing its detail.
Munabadhah: If a man throws to another a garment in exchange for a garment that the other throws
to him without both of them examining them.
Murabaha: Literally it means a sale on mutually agreed profit. Technically, it is a contract of sale in
which the seller declares his cost and the profit. This has been adopted by Islamic banks as a mode of
financing. As a financing technique, it can involve a request by the client to the bank to purchase a
certain item for him. The bank does that for a definite profit over the cost.
Murabaha lil ’amri bil Shira or Murabaha li Wa´da bi Shira : Murabaha to Purchase Orderer.
Mus¯aqah: A contract in which the owner of a garden shares its produce with another person in return
for his services in irrigating the garden.
Musawamah: A general kind of sale in which the price of the commodity to be traded is bargained
between the seller and the purchaser without any reference to the price paid or cost incurred by the
former.
Musharakah: Partnership between two parties, who both provide capital towards the financing of a
project. Both parties share profits on a pre-agreed ratio, but losses are shared on the basis of equity
participation. Management of the project is carried out by both parties. However, the partners also
have a right to forego the right of management/work in favour of any specific partner or person. There
are two main forms of Musharakah: Permanent Musharakah and Diminishing Musharakah.
Mustarsal: An unknowing entrant into the market – not aware of the market.
Muzara‘a: Share cropping; a contract in which one person agrees to till the land of another person in
return for a part of the produce of the land.
Najash: Bidding up the price without an intention to purchase and take delivery of the commodity.
Nass: Clear texts of the Shar ¯ı´ah, i.e. the Qur´ ¯an and Sunnah.
Naw¯ahi: Prohibitions – acts prohibited by Islam.
Niyyah: Intent or intention while doing a job or action.
Qabul: Acceptance, in a contract (see also Ijab).
Qard: Literally “to cut”. It is so called because the property is cut off – transferred to the borrower.
Legally, Qard means to give anything having value in the ownership of the other by way of virtue
so that the latter may avail himself of the same for his benefit with the condition that the same or
similar amount of that thing will be paid back on demand or at the settled time. The repayment of
loan is obligatory. Loans under Islamic law can be classified into Salaf and Qard, the former being a
loan for a fixed time and the latter payable on demand. Qard is, in fact, a particular kind of Salaf (see
Salaf).
Qard al Hasan : A virtuous loan. A loan with the stipulation to return the principal sum in the future
without any increase; in Islamic law, all loans have to be virtuous, as seeking any benefit from loaning
amounts to Riba.
Qim¯ar: Games of chance – gambling. Technically, it is an arrangement in which possession of a
property is contingent upon the happening of an uncertain event. By implication, this applies to a
situation in which there is a loss for one party and a gain for the other without specifying which party
will lose and which will gain.



Glossary 493
Qir¯ad: Another name for Mudarabah – partnership in which a person or a group of people provides
funds while another provides entrepreneurship for conducting the business.
Qir¯ad mithl : Matching rate in Qirad/Mudarabah, which has to be paid to the Mudarib if the
Mudarabah/Muqaradah contract becomes voidable due to any technical reason.
Qirsh: A coin of inferior metals used in ancient Iraq for making payment.
Qis¯as: A provision of Islamic law to punish those who cause any harm to human lif e – a murderer is
executed to death in exchange.
Qiyami or Qimi : Nonfungible goods; the value of each unit of which is different.
Qiy¯as: Analogy – literally it means to measure or compare for analogy. Technically, it means a
derivation of the law on the analogy of an existing law if the basis (‘Illah) of the two is the same. It
is one of the sources of Islamic law.
Ra’asul-m¯al: Principal amount of a loan or a debt or money invested in a business.
R¯a‘iee: In charge – one who is responsible for his subordinates.
Rabbul-m¯al: The person who invests the capital in a Shirkah/Mudarabah contract.
Riba: Literally, an excess or increase. Technically, it means an increase over the principal in a loan
transaction, over a debt or in exchange transactions, accrued to the lender/creditor or a party to exchange
without giving an equivalent counter value or recompense (‘iwad) in return to the other party.
Riba Al-Fadl : The quality premium in exchange of low quality with better quality goods, e.g. dates
for dates, wheat for wheat, etc. – an excess in the exchange of Ribawi goods in the case of a single
genus on both sides. The concept of Riba Al-Fadl refers to exchange/sale transactions.
Riba Al-Nasiah: Riba of delay, due to exchange not being immediate with or without excess in one of
the counter values. It is an increment on the principal of a loan or debt payable. It refers to loan/credit
transactions or lending money on the understanding that the borrower will return to the lender at
the end of the period the amount originally lent together with an increase on it, in consideration of the
lender having granted him time to pay. Interest, in all modern banking transactions, falls under the
purview of Riba Al-Nasiah.
Ribawi: Goods subject to Fiqh rules on Riba in sales – monetary units and items sold by weight
and/or by measure, including gold, silver, paper currencies, edible goods like wheat, rice, barley, dates,
salt, etc.
Ribh-al-mithl: Matching rate of profit.
Rihn or Rahn : Pledge, collateral; legally, Rihn means to pledge or lodge a real or corporeal property
of material value as security for a debt or pecuniary obligation, so as to make it possible for the
creditor to recover the debt, in the case of nonpayment, by selling the pledged property.
Rukb¯an: Grain dealers coming from the tribal/rural areas to the town to sell goods.
S¯a‘a: A measure that was used for exchanging/trading grains.
Sadd al-Zar ¯ai‘: To prohibit a transaction on the grounds of blocking the means to an illicit end.
Sah¯abah: Companions of the holy Prophet of Islam – the people who saw the holy Prophet while
being firm believers (Muslims).
Salaf: Used in two senses: (i) literally, payment in advance; a loan which draws forth no profit for the
creditor; it includes loans for specified periods, i.e. short, intermediate and long-term loans; slightly
different from Qard – an amount given as Salaf cannot be called back, unlike Qard, before it is due.



494 Understanding Islamic Finance
Also, another name of Salam – forward sale; (ii) Forebears – jurists and scholars of early periods of
Islam.
Sanad¯at: Certificates of investment – another name for Sukuk.
Sarf: Contract in which both exchange items are gold, silver or any monetary units.
Saw´¯am-bi-sawaa´: Equal for equal (in exchange transactions).
Shar¯ı´ah: Divine guidance as given by the Holy Qur’ ¯an and the Sunnah of the Prophet Muhammad
(pbuh); embodies all aspects of the Islamic faith, including beliefs and practice.
Shart-e-Jaz¯ai: A clause that a purchaser can put into an Istisna‘a agreement whereby the price of the item
being manufactured would decrease in the case of a delay in delivery by the seller/manufacturer whereby
the delay benefits the purchaser – unlike all other modes in which any penalty imposed due to default or
delay in payment of liabilities goes to the charity account and not to the banks’P&L accounts.
Shirkah: Commingling by two or more people of their money or work or obligations to earn a profit or
a yield or appreciation in value and to share the loss, if any, according to their proportionate ownership.
In the present Islamic banking terminology, it may include both Musharakah and Mudarabah and
various kinds of Musharakah like business/commercial partnership, partnership by ownership and
permanent or redeemable partnership.
Shirkatul‘aqd: Commercial/business partnershi p – a contract between two or more people who launch
a business or an enterprise to make profits.
Shirkatulmilk: Partnership by ownership or in the right of ownership; not for business.
Shuf‘ah: Pre-emptive right of a partner in a joint ownership or a neighbour in sale of landed properties.
Suftajah: An instrument in traditional Islamic finance used for cash transfer/payment which involved
the act of depositing a certain amount of money with someone for settlement or to the benefit of the
depositor or his representative at another place or in another country. A type of instrument used for the
delegation of credit during the Muslim period, especially the Abbasides period. It was used to collect
taxes, disburse government dues and transfer funds by merchants.
Sukuk: Certificates of equal value representing undivided share in ownership of tangible assets of
particular projects or specific investment activity, usufruct and services.
Sunnah: Literally, custom, habit or way of life. Technically, it refers to actions, sayings and utterances
of the holy Prophet Muhammad (pbuh), or actions of others tacitly approved by him, as reported in
the books of Hadith.
T‘azir: Punishments not expressly provided in the Holy Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah; awarded by a judge at
his own discretion, keeping in mind the severity of the crime.
T‘aliq: Conditions which suspend a contract to any future event.
Ta’mein: Arabic word used for insurance.
Tabarru‘: Benefits given by a person to another without getting anything in exchange. For example,
gracious repayment of debt, absolutely at the lender’s own discretion and without any prior condition
or inducement for reward is covered under Tabarru‘. Repaying a loan in excess of the principal and
without a precondition is commendable and compatible with the Sunnah of the holy Prophet (pbuh).
But it is matter of individual discretion and cannot be adopted as a system, because this would mean
that a loan would necessarily yield a profit, making it usurious.
Tabzir: Spending wastefully on objects which have been explicitly prohibited by the Shar ¯ı´ah, irre-
spective of the amount of expenditure (see also Isr ¯af).



Glossary 495
Takaful: A form of Islamic insurance based on the principle of Ta’awon or mutual assistance. It
provides for mutual assistance in cases of loss to life, assets and property and offers joint risk-sharing
in the event of a loss incurred by one of the pool members.
Taqwa: Piety, virtue and righteousness with a sense of accountability to Allah (SWT). It encompasses
not only obedience to Allah, but also the love of fellow human beings, who should be treated as part
of an extended human family.
Tawarruq: Acquiring cash through trade activities – to buy on credit and sell at spot value with the
objective of getting cash, meaning that the trade transaction was not needed by the buyer; he simply
wanted liquidity, which he got by purchasing a commodity on credit and selling the same to a third
party on cash.
Thaman: Price, monetary value of a commodity in an exchange.
Thaman-e-mithl: Normal/market price that has to be paid in case any issue arises in deciding the
actual price in any transaction.
Ujrah: Wages/service fees against work done for others; Ijarah of services; different from Ju‘alah
which means giving a reward for accomplishment of a defined task. While in Ujrah, acceptance of
“offer” by a specified person is necessary, in Ju‘alah, anyone who hears the offer can undertake the
work and becomes entitled to reward only upon completion of the job.
Ujratul-mithl: A remuneration or compensation which has to be given as per normal market rate if
the underlying contract(s) become voidable.
Uqood-e-Mu‘awadha: Commutative contracts in which one can genuinely take any return, like
contracts of Bai‘, Ijarah and Wakalah.
Uqood Ghair Mu‘awadha : Noncommutative contracts wherein one cannot get any return or com-
pensation, like contracts of loan (Qard), gift (Tabarru‘/Hibah), Guarantee (Kafalah) and assignment of
debt (Hawalah).
W‘adah: Promise – does not create contractual rights and obligations; may be binding or unbinding.
Wadi‘ah:A m ¯anah or deposit; the trustee is not responsible for loss except in the case of negligence
on his part. If, however, the Am ¯anah amount is used in business, with the permission of the owner,
the amount becomes the trustee’s liability.
Wakalah: Contract of agency, can be commutative or noncommutative.
Wakalatul Istism ¯ar: Investment agency – fund management in which the investor gets all the profit
or loss while the fund manager gets a pre-agreed service fee or commission that could be a lump sum
amount or a certain percentage of the invested capital.
Waqf: Retention of a property for the benefit of a charitable or humanitarian objective, or for a
specified group of people such as members of the donor’s family. There are three kinds of Waqf in
Islamic jurisprudence: religious Waqf, philanthropic Waqf and family Waqf. The Waqf property can
neither be sold nor inherited or donated to anyone.
Yadam-bi-yadin: Hand to hand or on the spot (in exchange transactions).
Zakah/Zakat: Zakah is the third out of five pillars of Islam. A religious tax on Muslims having wealth
over and above an exemption limit (Nisab) at a rate fixed by the Shar ¯ı´ah. As such, it is not a tax on
income, but on the assets held by a Muslim at a prescribed date (a Zakat day has to be determined for
calculation of Zakat money to be paid annually) over and above the amount of Nisab after fulfilment
of the normal needs of the owner. The objective is to take away a part of the wealth of the well-to-do
and to distribute it among the poor and the needy. It is levied on cash, cattle, agricultural produce,



496 Understanding Islamic Finance
minerals, capital invested in industry and business, etc. The rates are different for different natures of
assets. The recipients of Zakah funds have been identified in the Holy Qur’ ¯an (9: 60) and are the poor,
the needy, Zakah collectors, new converts to Islam, travellers in difficulty, captives and debtors and
for the cause of the Almighty.
Zulm: Injustice, usurping others’ rights, not giving proper recompense in an exchange by way of any
illegal act or coercion.

