
----- p.21 (pdf 49) -----


2
Distinguishing Features of the Islamic
Economic System
2.1 INTRODUCTION
The global economic scenario as described in Chapter 1 necessitates the evolution of a
system that could lead to a balanced, sustainable and equitable economic order in the world
at large for the benefit of individuals and societies. Islamic economic principles can become
a basis for promoting a balance between the social and economic aspects of human society,
the self and social interests, and between the individual, family, society and the State. At the
global level, it could be helpful in eliminating sources of instability, thus making the world
a happier place with harmony among followers of various religions.
Although the aspects directly related to the subject of this book pertain to banking and
finance, it is worthwhile to discuss the overall framework of Islamic economics within which
the Islamic financial system is supposed to work. Accordingly, this chapter will discuss the
fundamentals of the Islamic economic worldview having a direct or indirect impact upon
the business of Islamic financial institutions and the markets.
2.2 ISLAMIC SHAR ¯I´AH AND ITS OBJECTIVES
Before we discuss economics and economic aspects of human beings in the light of Islamic
Shar¯ı´ah (Shar¯ı´ah in brief) we should explain what Islamic Shar¯ı´ah is and what its objectives
(Maq¯asid) are. This is because all business and financial contracts in the framework of
Islamic finance have to conform to the Shar ¯ı´ah rules with the objective of helping to achieve
Maq¯asid al Shar ¯ı´ah. Shar¯ı´ah refers to a code of law or divine injunctions that regulate the
conduct of human beings in their individual and collective lives. In addition to some general
rules there are some specific branches of these injunctions which are: Aq ¯aid, or matters of
belief and worship; Akhl ¯aq, or matters for disciplining one’s self; Ahkam, or socio-economic
and legal systems; Fr ¯aidh, or obligations; and Naw ¯ahi, or prohibitions. Islamic economics
directly or indirectly deals with all these disciplines.
2.2.1 Sources of Shar ¯ı´ah Tenets
The primary source of the divine law is the revelation – the Holy Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah of the
holy Prophet (pbuh) (Muslims believe in terms of Qur’ ¯anic injunctions that an established
Sunnah of the prophet is based on the revelation). 1 Accepting the revelation as the source of
tenets and information requires complete submission to Shar ¯ı´ah rules. According to Islamic
1 See, for example, verses 3 and 4 of Surah 53 of the Holy Qur’ ¯an.


----- p.22 (pdf 50) -----


22 Understanding Islamic Finance
belief, the Qur’ ¯an is the last revealed book from the Almighty, free from any tampering
until the Hereafter (Qur’ ¯an; 15: 9); obedience to the injunctions contained in it is considered
necessary by all Muslims, at least conceptually. The Sunnah, which consists of the sayings
of and the actions done and/or approved by the holy Prophet (pbuh), is an equally important
source of information in Islamic law. The importance of sticking to the Sunnah is obvious
from the following verse of the Holy Qur’ ¯an: Allah says, “Indeed you have in the Messenger
of Allah an excellent example for the one who hopes in Allah and looks to the Last Day”
(33: 21). The Exalted also says: “So if you obey him (i.e. Muhammad, pbuh), only then you
will be guided” (24: 54). Almost all Muslims believe that obedience to the orders of the
holy Prophet is necessary for being a Muslim.
The other sources of Shar ¯ı´ah tenets are Ijma‘a (consensus) and Qiy ¯as (analogy), which
are based on Ijtihad. Ijtihad, the mental effort of scholars having juristic expertise to find
solutions to emerging problems and issues, and Qiy ¯as, or finding solutions through analogy
in the light of the text of the Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah, are the secondary sources for derivation
of rules and regulation for any upcoming events or issues. Ijma‘a of the Companions of the
holy Prophet is considered by the overwhelming majority of Muslims an important source
for the derivation of laws subsequently. The general welfare/interest (Maslaha-e-Mursalah)
of human beings and ‘Urf (prevalent practice) are also important tools in the hands of
Islamic jurists that are kept in mind for deciding the Shar ¯ı´ah position of various contracts
and activities without compromising on the basic tenets contained in the Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah.
The jurists, Shar¯ı´ah scholars, Shar¯ı´ah boards of Islamic banks and other institutions dealing
with Shar ¯ı´ah matters are required to suggest solutions and issue edicts regarding various
activities on the basis of the above sources of Shar ¯ı´ah.
Shar¯ı´ah rules can be divided into Dos (orders to undertake any act) and Don’ts (prohibition
from some acts), which can further be divided into the rituals (matters of worship) that are
considered as rights of Allah (SWT) and the matters for disciplining human life that constitute
the rights of human beings. While the former acts (rituals or matters relating to belief and
worship in the form of Fr ¯aidh or obligations) have to be accomplished strictly according to
the Shar ¯ı´ah tenets, the latter matters that pertain to socio-economic rights and obligations
are governed by the rule of “General Permissibility” (Ib ¯ahatul Asliyah), which means that
all acts and things which have not been expressly prohibited by the original sources of
Shar¯ı´ah are permissible. It is pertinent to observe, however, that while Allah (SWT) may
like to forgive any of the lapses by Muslims in respect of His rights (first category), lapses
in respect of the rights of human beings would have to be forgiven only by the aggrieved
person(s). Further, it is a cardinal principle of Islam that everyone is accountable for his acts
and the accountability is individual, both in rituals and in socio-economic contracts.
2.2.2 Objectives (Maq ¯asid) of Shar ¯ı´ah
The study of objectives is significant, as they reflect the spirit of the Shar ¯ı´ah and help jurists
in determining the prohibition or permissibility of any matters on the basis of Ijtihad and
Qiy¯as. Catering to the well-being of the people in the worldly life as well as in the Hereafter
or relieving them of hardship is the basic objective of Shar ¯ı´ah. Islam takes a positive view
of life considering man as the viceroy of God. Virtue does not mean abandoning the beauties
of life, but enjoying those while remaining within the framework of the values through
which Islam seeks to maximize human welfare. It requires living a morally responsible life,
earning only by fair means and considering wealth as a stewardship for which account is to
be rendered to Allah Almighty.


----- p.23 (pdf 51) -----


Distinguishing Features of the Islamic Economic System 23
According to conventional economics, livelihood is the fundamental problem of man and
economic development is the ultimate goal of human life. According to Islamic economics,
livelihood is necessary and indispensable but is not the true and the only purpose of human
life; the life hereafter is the real factor to be taken care of. This way, Islam also caters for
the welfare of man in the Hereafter. Wealth in all its possible forms is created by Allah, it
belongs to Allah; He has delegated the right of property to man for use and He has the right
to demand that man subordinates his use of wealth to the commandments of Allah. “He it
is who made you vicegerents in the earth” (6: 165) and “does the man think that he will be
just left to himself” (75: 36). Wealth has to be used in such a way that it ensures success in
this world and the world hereafter.
The overall objective of Shar ¯ı´ah behind these injunctions is the happiness and well-being
of human beings in this world and the world hereafter. The concept of happiness from
the Islamic perspective is different from the concept of pleasure – the major objective of
positive economics. Accordingly, everything which guarantees well-being and fulfils the
supreme interests of mankind is included in the objectives of Shar ¯ı´ah. These objectives
have been identified by jurists like Ghaz ¯ali, Sh ¯atbi and subsequently by Tahir ibne Ashoor
by an inductive survey of the Holy Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah. The objectives can be divided into
primary and secondary objectives.
Primary Objectives
The primary objectives that Shar ¯ı´ah tends to realize are the protection and preservation of:
1. Religion.
2. Life.
3. Progeny – family unit.
4. Property.
5. Intellect.
6. Honour.
The protection of religion means achieving the purpose of worship of Allah (SWT). In
Islam there is a comprehensive system of beliefs and Shar ¯ı´ah makes it the responsibility of
the State to implement Shar ¯ı´ah requirements in respect of beliefs.
The protection and preservation of human life refers to the sanctity of life as emphasized
in the Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah. There is the law of Qis ¯as to punish those who cause any harm
to human life. This objective also refers to the provision of basic necessities to all human
beings.
The protection of progeny or the family unit relates to marriage and the family institution,
whose purposes are: procreation, protection against lack of chastity and the proper upbringing
of children, enabling them to become good human beings and Muslims and to bring peace
and tranquility to society. Means to realize this objective are the promotion of the marriage
contract, tenets relating to family life and the prohibition of adultery.
The protection of wealth and property refers to the sanctity of the wealth of all members
of society, with an emphasis on valid (Halal) earning and discouragement of a concentration
of wealth leading to a vast gap between the poor and the rich and the inability of the former
to meet their basic needs of food, health and fundamental education. For this purpose, Islam
provides a comprehensive law governing Mu‘ ¯amal¯at or transactions among members of a
society.


----- p.24 (pdf 52) -----


24 Understanding Islamic Finance
The promotion of human intellect refers to acquiring knowledge, thus enabling people to
differentiate between good and bad and to play their part in enhancing the welfare of human
society as a whole.
The protection of human honour and dignity refers to the prohibition of false accusations,
the right to privacy and the sanctity of private life. 2
Secondary Objectives
The above primary objectives of Shar ¯ı´ah lead to a number of secondary objectives,
which are:
1. The establishment of justice and equity in society.
2. The promotion of social security, mutual help and solidarity, particularly to help the poor
and the needy in meeting their basic needs.
3. The maintenance of peace and security.
4. The promotion of cooperation in matters of goodness and prohibition of evil deeds and
actions.
5. The promotion of supreme universal moral values and all actions necessary for the
preservation and authority of nature.
Relating the objectives of Shar ¯ı´ah with human welfare, Muhammad Umer Chapra, an
economist at the Jeddah-based Islamic Development Bank (IDB), contends:
“However, if well-being were to be defined in a way that rises above the materialist and hedonist
sense and incorporates humanitarian and spiritual goals, then economics may not be able to avoid
a discussion of what these goals are and how they may be realized. These goals may include
not only economic well being, but also human brotherhood and socio-economic justice, mental
peace and happiness, and family as well as social harmony. One of the tests for the realization of
these goals may be the extent to which social equality, need fulfilment of all, full employment,
equitable distribution of income and wealth, and economic stability have been attained without a
heavy debt-servicing burden, high rates of inflation, undue depletion of nonrenewable resources, or
damage to the ecosystem in a way that endangers life on Earth. Another test may be the realization
of family and social solidarity, which would become reflected in the mutual care of members of
society for each other, particularly the children, the aged, the sick, and the vulnerable, and absence,
or at least minimization, of broken families, juvenile delinquency, crime, and social unrest.”
He adds:
“The spiritual and humanitarian goals stated above are of equal, if not of greater importance /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiThe
material and the spiritual aspects of well-being are not, therefore, independent of each other. They
are closely interrelated. Greater family harmony may help raise better individuals to operate in
the market, and better social harmony may create a more conducive environment for effective
government and accelerated development. If this is true, then the emphasis on serving self-interest
and maximizing wealth and consumption may have to be toned down to some extent to serve social
interest and optimize human well-being. Some uses of resources that serve self-interest and fit well
into the hedonist framework may have to be reduced to fulfil the needs of all individuals in society
and thereby promote family and social harmony.” 3
2 For further details, see Chapra, 2000a, pp. 115–125 and Mansoori, 2005, pp. 11, 12.
3 Chapra, 2000a, pp. 4–8. (Also published in The Journal of Socio-economics , 29, pp. 21–37).


----- p.25 (pdf 53) -----


Distinguishing Features of the Islamic Economic System 25
Hence, from the study of the Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah, some basic socio-economic rights of
human beings have been identified. These rights are:
1. The right to safety.
2. The right to be informed.
3. The right to choose.
4. The right to be heard.
5. The right to satisfaction of basic needs.
6. The right to redress.
7. The right to education.
8. The right to a healthy environment.
Islam requires rulers and various regulators in the system to protect the masses from harm
and hardship caused by unscrupulous factors in society through strong and effective laws,
and they should be respected in the sense of fulfilment of all socio-economic rights. The
State must also curb institutional and other malpractices.
2.3 WHY STUDY ISLAMIC ECONOMICS?
A cursory look at the above objectives will reveal that economic aspects or matters relating
to the sustenance of human beings command a central place in the realm of Shar ¯ı´ah. Man
is largely concerned in his life with two main aspects, namely material resources/means of
sustenance and religious beliefs. Studying economics is important for the dual purpose of
having better sustenance and religious imperatives. Islam does not like the concept of the
“pious person” as distinct from the “worldly person”. It enjoins a system of devotions/worship
as well as guides on the economy, political affairs and international relations. Regarding this
integrated approach, the Holy Qur’ ¯an says:
It is not righteousness that ye turn your faces towards East or West; but it is righteousness to
believe in Allah and the Last Day, and the Angels, and the Book and the Messengers; to spend of
your substance, out of love for Him, for your kin, for orphans, for the needy, for the wayfarer, for
those who ask, and for the ransom of slaves; to be steadfast in prayer, and practise regular charity,
to fulfil the contracts which we have made; and to be firm and patient, in pain (or suffering) and
adversity, and throughout all periods of panic. Such are the people of truth, God fearing. (2: 177)
Professor Dr Anis Ahmad explains beautifully the implications of the above verse of the
Holy Qur’ ¯an by saying:
“While the verse begins with a reference to spending substantially for one’s kin, it immediately refers
to orphans, the needy, travellers and others who may fall in to the category of strangers. /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiAn
objective analysis of the Qur’ ¯anic teachings informs us about the social and human dimensions of
the Qur’ ¯anic message. A book which does not want any human being to be enslaved politically,
economically, culturally and educationally, is relevant for all human beings. Muslims and others
should directly undertake an unbiased, critical and objective analysis of the Qur’ ¯an so as to
understand its message to humanity. The ethic-centric approach of the Qur’ ¯an makes its teachings
valuable and relevant for all who are concerned with the future of humanity. It offers the most
reliable way of building a sustainable and peaceful world order.” 4
4 Ahmad, Anis, 1997.


----- p.26 (pdf 54) -----


26 Understanding Islamic Finance
Thus, Islam emphasizes fair and equitable distribution of resources and meeting the
needs of economically feeble people as part of devotion, worship and faith. It induces its
followers to relate their piety (Taqwa) with social realities. It persuades a person to share
the blessings and bounties of Allah with others as a matter of obligation by declaring that
Taqwa encompasses not only the love of Allah, but also the love of fellow human beings,
who should be treated as part of an extended human family. This refers in a way to the need
to study the economic aspects of mankind.
M.A. Mannan has indicated seven reasons or socio-economic imperatives for the study of
Islamic economics, which are broadly covered by the above two factors. These imperatives
are ideological, economic, social, ethical, political, historical and international. To him:
“The significance of the study of Islamic economics lies in its balanced focus on the production of
goods and services as well as other determinants of the ‘quality of life’ for which value judgement
may be needed within the Islamic value framework. Accordingly, Islamic economics being an
integrated body of knowledge does overlap with other disciplines such as religion, sociology,
political science in a much more significant way than secular economics. The fact is that Islamic
economics cannot remain neutral between different ends. It is concerned with what is and what
ought to be, in the light of the Shar ¯ı´ah. Therefore, it involves the study of social, political, ethical
and moral issues affecting the economic problems directly or indirectly.” 5
The Islamic world as a whole is underdeveloped and backward when compared to the
Western developed countries. Some Muslim economists have been emphasizing for many
years the study and development of Islamic economics to help the underdeveloped countries
come out of the vicious circle of poverty, ignorance and illiteracy. But the backwardness and
underdevelopment of the Muslim world is not the only imperative for the study of Islamic
economics. The global socio-economic situation in the world, which indicates the failure of
all secularist systems, also calls for finding any better alternative for solving the problems
of massive underdevelopment and injustice in the world, where the rich and the affluent,
both in the developed and the developing world, have increasingly become accustomed to
“hyper-consumption”, leaving billions of human beings starved, illiterate and lacking any
socio-cultural position. This luxurious and conspicuous/lavish consumption has led to a
general trend of spending to enhance social status as well as to get pleasure. 6
As a direct result of this trend, “Trickle-down” and all other economic theories that referred
to automatic care of the poor when the growth rate or national income rises have failed. The
Western concept of the welfare state has now been replaced by “the least government is the
best government”. The market is now the engine of economic growth and State intervention
in removing income disparities between households and various groups in society is more
of a myth than a reality. This system is producing poverty.
Even the normative part in modern capitalist economies is the outcome of the Enlight-
enment movement, the worldview of which was basically secularist. It considered all the
revealed truths of religion as “simply figments of the imagination, nonexistent, indeed at
the bottom priestly inventions designed to keep men ignorant of the ways of Reason and
Nature”. This weakened the hold of religion and the collective sanction it provides to moral
values, and thus deprived society of morally-oriented filtering, motivating and restructuring
mechanisms.7
5 Mannan, 1984.
6 The Economist , London, 24th December–6th January, 2006, pp. 66, 67.
7 Chapra, 1996, p. 14.


----- p.27 (pdf 55) -----


Distinguishing Features of the Islamic Economic System 27
As the main theme of the Islamic economic system revolves around care for the poor
and socio-economic justice, studying Islamic economics should be a strategic activity for
economists and policymakers. The Islamic economic system can be studied properly only in
the context of the Islamic way of life as a whole. The Holy Qur’ ¯an gives broad principles
of values regarding the economic aspects of man’s life, like an owner’s attitude towards
his property, society’s attitude towards the needy, the cooperative basis of the economic
relationship and the bias against a concentration of wealth. The individual must be mindful
of other ends while planning for economic ends. He has to subject each and every activity
to thorough scrutiny, avoiding all those forms which are injurious to social interest.
2.3.1 The Role of Islamic Economists
The early Islamic jurists mainly advised individuals and rulers on behaviour in economic mat-
ters and economic policies. In the later period, they also analysed such economic thoughts as
trading, prices, money, profit-sharing, taxes, development, etc. They gave special importance
to ethics and moral purposes and focused on justice, need fulfilment, efficiency, freedom,
growth and development. Those who did work of outstanding nature included Imams of
juristic schools of thought like Abu Hanifa, Malik, Shafii, Ahmad ibn-e-Hanbal, Zaid bin
Ali, and others like Muhammad bin Hasan al Sheibani, Abu Yusuf, Yahya bin Adam, Abu
Ubaid, Qudama bin Jafar, Ali ibn Muhammad Al Mawardi, Nizamul Mulk Tusi, Nasiruddin
Tusi, Abu Hamid Muhammad Ghazali, Ibn Taymiyah, Ibn Qayyim, Ibn Khaldun, al Maqrizi
and Shah Waliullah. The contributions from a few of the jurists are briefly given hereunder:
• Ibn Khaldun’s 8 empirical social inquiry gave him the unique perception of causal inter-
dependence of political and economic power as well as pressures which are generated by
vested interests in an organized society.
• With regard to the activity of public and private sectors in an economy, it may be
relevant to point out that Ibn Khaldun, in his Muqaddamah (literally an “Introduction to
History”, which has been described by the renowned historian Professor Arnold Toynbee
as “the greatest work of its kind that has been created by any man in any time or place”)
strongly supported free private enterprise and advocated that “capitalists amongst the
inhabitants of cities need rank and protection”. He was against government meddling with
the market mechanism by inequitable taxation or by direct participation in production
and distribution. He believed that a State monopoly in commerce and agriculture ruins
the economy.
• Ibn Khaldun anticipated Adam Smith in his theory of labour value; Malthus for the
theory of population and Keynes for a normative role for the State. He also presented
a coherent theory of economic growth. As such, he can be treated as the founder of
economic science. His ideas on the market system, production, exchange and consumption
of wealth, macroeconomics, taxation, role of the government, money, labour, etc. provide
a valuable study of economic thought and the system.
• Ibn Khaldun states: “The finances of a ruler can be increased and his financial resources
improved only through the revenue from the taxes. The revenue from taxes can be
8 Abu Zayd, Waliyuddeen ’Abdur Rahmaan Ibne Muhammad, popularly known as Ibn Khaldun – the greatest Muslim social
scholar of the Middle Ages ( ad 1332–1406). For his contribution to economics, see Boulakia, 1971. Also see a note on him at
http://www.islamicissues.info/essays_others.html.


----- p.28 (pdf 56) -----


28 Understanding Islamic Finance
improved only through the equitable treatment of people with property and regard for
them /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiother means taken by the ruler, such as engaging in commerce and agriculture,
soon turn out to be harmful to the subjects, to be ruinous to revenue and to decrease
cultural activities”. Also, like Adam Smith, Ibn Khaldun noticed that productivity depends
on the extent of the market, division of labour and specialization.
• With his profound historical, political and economic insight, Ibn Khaldun warned that
the growth of absolute power in the State is the cause of decline of economic prosperity.
For, according to him, absolute power has to be preserved by expanding bureaucracy,
the army and the police, which have to be supported by increased taxation, confiscation
and, worst still, by direct interference of the State in economic activity by engaging in
commerce and industry.
• Ibn Taymiyah9 discussed the concepts of Thaman-e-mithl (normal/market price or wage),
economic freedom, pricing in the market, the role of the ombudsman and the functions
of the government in the development of a smooth and just socio-economic order.
• The thirteenth century Memorandum of Nasiruddin Tusi laid down guidance for the
Mongol kings on the financial administration of the then Iran.
• Shah Waliullah discussed basic principles on production and exchange of wealth. 10
With regard to the contribution of the Islamic world to trade and economics in the Middle
Ages, Maurice Lombard, in his book The Golden Age of Islam (originally published in 1971
in French and translated into English in 1975) writes:
“The Muslim East provided the driving force behind economic and cultural life; the West was a
Void – an area in which all commercial and intellectual activity had ceased after the decline and
fall of Rome and the subsequent barbarian invasions. /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiGreat ports provided the Muslim World
with ships, dockyards, and seafaring populations. There were three enormous complexes: first,
shipping in the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea, which Arab and Persian sailors opened up towards
the Indian Ocean and which was complemented by the river-boats of the Euphrates and Tigris;
next, the ports of Syria and Egypt, foremost of which was Alexandria, backed by the river-boats
of the Nile; finally, the ports on the Sicilian Strait and the Strait of Gibraltar, supported by the
river-boats on the Guadalquivir. Caravan towns also possessed transport systems which dominated
the Mesopotamian routes (running westwards towards Syria and eastwards towards Iran and central
Asia), the Arabian routes, and the Berber trading routes crossing the Sahara. (p. 8)
The centre of the Muslim World was situated in the Isthmus region, bounded by the Persian Gulf,
the Red Sea, the Mediterranean, the Black Sea, and the Caspian Sea. It was, therefore, set at the inter-
section of two major economic units: the Indian Ocean area and the Mediterranean area. These two
territories, united in Hellenistic times but later split into two rival worlds, the Roman–Byzantine and
the Parthico–Sassanian, were now reunited by the Muslim conquest, so as to form a new, vast terri-
tory which was economically one. This unity rested on large-scale trading relations along caravan and
maritime routes, on one main currency, the Muslim Dinar, and one international commercial language,
Arabic. /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiFinally, the unity mentioned above was helped by the reintroduction into world trade of
the great consumer markets of the western Mediterranean /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmi” (p. 9)
With regard to the growth of money in the Islamic economy in the 10th century, he says:
“Finally, monetary economy was important, and was expressed in an abundant minting of dinars
made possible by the influx of new gold and the development of credit, which doubled the circulation
9 For the contribution of Ibn Taymiyah, see Ahmad, 1961.
10 For details on the contribution by Islamic jurists to economics, see Chapra, 2000a, pp. 145–172; Siddiqi, 2002.


----- p.29 (pdf 57) -----


Distinguishing Features of the Islamic Economic System 29
of currency. In the ninth century, /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmithe growth of wealth and commercial transactions was so
great that actual cash could be seen changing hands in the smallest townships where, hitherto,
simple barter had been the only method in use. And so the enlarged area of money circulation was
matched by a greater power wielded by town over country.”
Referring to the fall of the Muslim world he says:
“(it) received a mortal blow in the form of the crises, the disturbances, the invasions of the second
half of the eleventh century. They impeded the powerful flow of trade, thereby provoking the
decline of the cities. Henceforward the Muslim World was not a united whole, but divided. There
was a Turkish Islam, a Persian Islam, a Syrian Islam, an Egyptian Islam, and a Maghreb Islam.
Gone was the single Muslim civilization and in its place was a resurgence of regional particularisms,
embodied in a number of different Muslim civilizations. (pp. 10, 11)
However, even during its economic decline, the Muslim World long continued to influence the
world in the realms of science, medicine and philosophy. It played a conspicuous part in medicine
especially, not only during the Renaissance but right up to the nineteenth century.” (For detail, see
pp. 236–239).
After the start of the Renaissance movement in the late 19th century, Islamic economics
started re-emerging as an intelligent academic pursuit. Scholars like Syed Qutab, Syed Abul
A’ala Mawdudi, Hifzurrehman Sweharvi, Muhammad Yusufuddin, Syed Baqar Sadre, and
Dr Hameedullah can be considered pioneers and scholars of the first generation in the
Modern World who initiated the process of defining modern economic thought in the light
of the principles of Islam. Formal work on Islamic economics in the modern world that has
led to a vigorous revival of Islamic economic thought has been done by a large number of
economists, notable among which are Anwar Iqbal Qureshi, Ahmad al Najjar, Nejatullah
Siddiqi, Sheikh Mahmud Ahmad, Mahmud Abud Saud, Muhammad Umar Zubair, Monzar
Kahaf, S.M. Hasanuz Zaman, Anas Zarqa, M.A. Mannan, Mohamed Ali Elgari, M. Umer
Chapra, Abbas Mirakhor, Mohsin S. Khan, Fahim Khan, Munawar Iqbal, Khurshid Ahmad
and many others.
Contemporary Islamic economists (of the second and the third generation) have discussed
almost all areas of modern economics including market forces, production, distribution,
consumption and allocation of resources, efficiency, scarcity, choice and opportunity cost,
the role of money, individual–society–State relationships, individual self-interest, the welfare
economy, mutual help (social welfare function), ethics and, last but not least, government
budgeting and finance and the economic responsibility of the State.
Considerable work has been done by well-known economists including Mohsin Khan,
Abbas Mirakhor, Zuber Iqbal, Nejatullah Siddiqi, Anas Zarqa, Monzar Kahaf and other
Islamic economists of the second and third generations, as mentioned above, on various
segments of economic management. These works largely pertain to interest-free banking
and interest-free investment and production. Also, a good deal of work has been done on
fiscal policy, Zakat, auditing and accounting, banking regulations and supervision.
But all of these are segments and have not been put together into a comprehensive model.
These segments (with variations) are being practised/implemented in several countries.
However, even in the contents and implementation of these segments, there is a lack of
uniformity. This is yet another problem which needs to be addressed both at scholarly and
operational levels.
The work is being done in different areas. But, Islamic economics in the form of a
complete model and a welfare function may take a longer time. It is obvious that where value
judgements are involved, quantification, and hence uniformity, is not possible, with clear


----- p.30 (pdf 58) -----


30 Understanding Islamic Finance
implications for both the formulation and implementation of policies. Before this is done,
Islamic economics can be introduced in parts only. This choice rests with individual countries.
2.4 ISLAMIC ECONOMICS: WHAT SHOULD IT BE?
To understand the possible structure of Islamic economics, enabling a society to realize the
objectives identified above, we may first of all discuss the concepts of economics proper
and normative economics. Economics proper, which is also called positive economics,
is concerned exclusively with the scientific explanation of behaviour under conditions of
scarcity. It is a science, value neutral and is concerned with empirical and not normative
aspects. Even where it deals with values and purposes, it deals with them objectively as
facts, which, along with other relevant data, determine what is or may be, but not what
should be. It describes, but does not prescribe. The definition of “Economics” by Lionel
Robbins is an example of positive economics. 11
The second kind of economics is normative or welfare economics, which is sometimes
called “political economy”. In the case of normative economics, policy recommendations
must involve some value judgements. The Islamic approach is that economic development
and creation of abundant wealth are means to satisfy human needs and support society.
These are not sought for boasting or spending in offence, arrogance or oppression. Linking
this world with the Hereafter, Islam enjoins Muslims to seek the Hereafter through what
they earn and not to forget their share of the worldly life. The Holy Qur’ ¯an says:
“And seek the abode of the Hereafter in that which Allah has given you, and do not neglect your
portion of worldly life, and be kind as Allah has been kind to you, and seek not disorder/corruption
in the earth”. (28: 77)
Therefore, Islamic rules of economics make it binding for human beings not only to abide
by the Shar ¯ı´ah tenets relating to dos and don’ts but also to keep in mind the impact of
their activities on others and society as a whole. To realize the goal, the State should try to
control the wants of the people through a filtering process, motivate the people to abstain
from activities injurious to others and restructure the socio-economic system for the transfer
of resources from one use/sector to others to ultimately realize the dual objective. 12
It is the welfare content which makes normative economics different from positive eco-
nomics. Broadly, welfare economics comprises the aims, goals and aspirations of society
and these are reduced into the utilitarian principle of greatest satisfaction of the maximum
number of people in society. Islamic economics tries mostly to remove injustice and inequal-
ity for promoting progress. To realize the objective, it accepts the basic concomitants of
the system of market economy, like the innate right of ownership, freedom of enterprise
and the competitive environment in business and industry. However, the vision of Islam in
this regard is different from the role models of present market systems which have become
outdated with the march of events. The Shar ¯ı´ah indicates the directions of transformation
towards a social order of justice, well-being, security and knowledge, but it does not impose
these laws. It tends to provide equal chances to all for earning a livelihood leading to equi-
table, not equal, distribution of income and wealth, just like blood in the human body that
11 Robbins, 1962.
12 Chapra, 2000a, pp. 357–369.


----- p.31 (pdf 59) -----


Distinguishing Features of the Islamic Economic System 31
is not distributed among various organs of the body equally because of the different nature
of the jobs rendered by each organ.
It is also because of the noncoercive nature of Shar ¯ı´ah that the market is relied upon as a
natural phenomenon of ethical human transformation. The holy Prophet (pbuh) categorically
discouraged intervention for price fixation as long as price fluctuations occurred due to
market forces alone. But when undue monopolistic and unjust pricing, production and
distributional practices were existent, Al-Hisbah (the institution of the ombudsman) was
empowered as a social regulatory body to check these imbalances for purposes of re-
establishing a better semblance of market-driven exchanges in the light of the just order that
Shar¯ı´ah aims at in society at large.
2.4.1 Islamic Economics Defined
Islamic economics has been defined differently by different economists/scholars, keeping
in mind specific aspects of human life. To Ibn Khaldun, economics meant the desire for
food and other requirements and efforts to obtain them; and a science which deals with
management of households and cities in accordance with dictates of reason as well as ethics,
so that the masses may be directed towards a behaviour that leads to the preservation and
performance of their species.
Mohsin S. Khan, a senior economist at the IMF, says:
“Broadly speaking, the term ‘Islamic Economics’ defines a complete system that prescribes a
specific pattern of social and economic behaviour for all individuals. It deals with a wide-ranging
set of issues, such as property rights, incentive system, allocation of resources, types of economic
freedom, system of economic decision-making and proper role of the government. The over-riding
objective of the system is social justice and specific patterns of income and wealth distribution and
consequently economic policies are to be designed to achieve these ends.”
S.M. Hasanuz Zaman, an IDB Laureate in Islamic economics, has critically examined
definitions by a number of scholars and given his own definition:
“Islamic Economics is the knowledge of application of injunctions and rules of the Shar ¯ı´ah that
stop injustice in the acquisition and disposition of material resources in order to provide satisfaction
to individuals and enable them to perform their obligations to Allah and society.” 13
This implies that Islamic economics is a social science which studies the economic
problems of people in the light of the values of Islam. One way of looking at Islamic
economics would be the use of resources for the welfare of the people within the framework
of Shar ¯ı´ah. Once a framework of the Shar ¯ı´ah has been adopted, it will determine various
aspects of economic management like the contents of production, trade, finance, distribution
and many other things.
Islamic economics deals with issues like how to create, distribute, own and enhance
property and wealth, how to spend and dispose of it for the benefit of individuals as well
as societies. The means of production of goods are almost the same for all nations, as
economic science is universal for all nations. As such, an Islamic economy would also be
producing/providing all goods and services required for the “welfare” of mankind. But the
economic system that determines how to distribute the wealth and how to possess, spend or
dispose of it, is different for different nations depending upon their ideology, and here lies
13 Hasanuz Zaman, 2000.


----- p.32 (pdf 60) -----


32 Understanding Islamic Finance
the difference between the Islamic economic system and the capitalistic or the socialistic
systems.
The integrated model of the Islamic social framework is based, among other things, on the
following criteria, which provide a positive motivation for economic activities, steered by the
concept of a fair balance between material and spiritual needs and between the individual’s
and social needs:
1. Equilibrium between work and worship.
2. Human equality.
3. Mutual responsibilities in society.
4. Distributive justice.
5. Balanced and beneficent use of the “bounties of God”.
6. Limited sovereignty of individuals in terms of “self interest” for the benefit of fellow
beings and society.
7. The principle of co-existence.
8. The freedom of conscience.
2.5 PARAPHERNALIA OF ISLAMIC ECONOMICS
The objective of the Islamic economic system, like any other economic system, is the real-
ization of efficiency and equity in allocation and distribution of resources, for which it
recognizes the role of market forces and the freedom of individuals. But it also recognizes
the possible adverse impact of the totally unregulated market on various sections of society,
particularly the poor and the disadvantaged. The pure materialistic “positive” approach has
never been capable of serving social interests and realizing such goals. The “invisible hand”
of market forces, as contended by Adam Smith, has failed to fulfil the social obligations
required for the ultimate socio-economic outcome of human actions. Hence, Islamic eco-
nomics provides ample room for State intervention to achieve an optimal mix of functioning
of market players guided by individual self-interest and serving the social interest by the
State’s facilitation and overseeing activities.
The urge for maximization of wealth by individuals without taking care of its impact
on the well-being of others or society as a whole cannot generate long-term sustainable
growth and well-being of individuals or societies. Therefore, both positive and normative
objectives are to be realized through market functioning supported by State facilitation and
intervention aimed at realization of socio-economic goals like need-fulfilment, an optimum
and stable growth rate, equitable distribution of income and wealth with class and ecological
coherence.
As indicated above, an economic system has to be discussed as a thought based upon
any ideology, while economic science should be considered a science which deals with the
creation of wealth. An economic system relates to the management of wealth distribution
in a society and enables or restricts its members from utilizing the means of production and
satisfaction. Production of goods and services and their distribution among various groups
in society, sources of funds for the State and their spending were the main areas of Islamic
economics and the system up to the Middle Ages. Commercial activities of that period
depicted a number of techniques of production, distribution, trade, payment and mobility of
money and credit.
Thus, the system comprises the following three main elements:


----- p.33 (pdf 61) -----


Distinguishing Features of the Islamic Economic System 33
1. Ownership of commodities and wealth. 14
2. Transfer of the ownership.
3. Distribution of wealth among the people.
The variables and thoughts used in economic analysis include the determinants of the level of
income and employment, money and banking, fiscal and monetary policies, national income
accounting, economic growth, demand and supply of money and stability. Details may also
include expenditure, the savings–investment relationship, the savings–income relationship,
consumption and investment functions, the potential level of output, employment, labour
force and profit as aggregate variables. All these determinants will correspond to principal
Islamic values and tenets.
The abolition of interest (Riba), promotion of trading and other real business activities,
establishment of profit-sharing as a tool, the application of Zakat and avoidance of wasteful
consumption (Isr ¯abf) along with an effective overseeing role of the State constitute the
key macroeconomic features of an ideal Islamic economy. Study of these variables would
indicate the state of any Islamic economy, its stability, weaknesses and strengths and various
relationships among producers and users of resources.
2.5.1 Ownership of Resources and Property Rights
Islamic economics, based on the paradigm of socio-economic justice, takes its roots from
the belief that all resources in the world belong to its Creator, One God; human beings are
holding these resources in trust. Behaving as vicegerent of the Creator, they are free to earn
and spend the wealth according to His orders given to mankind through His Messengers.
Man has to enjoy and use wealth under Allah’s command. Islam has given the individual
the freedom to earn a livelihood. Likewise, Islam has given every individual the right to
enjoy whatever wealth he has earned by legal means and whatever wealth he has received
through the Islamic law of inheritance.
Ownership by man is thus Divine permission for utilizing the goods and assets. The Holy
Qur’¯an says: “And give them from the M ¯al of Allah, which He gave to you.” (24: 33). It
also says: “And spend from what He put you in charge of ” (57: 7). As such, Islam has set
the limits and the means through which individuals, groups, the public and the State can
possess property in such a way that acquisition in varying degree is within reach of all the
people, despite disparities in their abilities. These limits are in terms of the quality or the
means of acquiring and not in terms of quantity of wealth, as this resists human beings’
strife to work diligently. Limits in terms of quality are necessary, otherwise human greed
could corrupt the economy and cause chaotic relationships in society. It also conforms to
human nature so as to satisfy their basic needs and enable people to benefit from comforts.
The following are the means of possessing goods: work, inheritance, purchasing/obtaining
property for sustenance, properties granted as gifts and the State granting possession of
something to the citizens. To facilitate the acquisition of property and wealth, Islam has
indicated legal means of ownership and its transfer through a variety of contracts. General
14 The term commodity includes everything possessed for utilization through buying, leasing or borrowing, whether by consumption,
such as an apple, or by usage, such as a car, or through utilizing it, like borrowing machinery or leasing a house. Property (M ¯al) is
anything that can be possessed and includes money, such as gold and silver, commodities, such as clothes and foodstuffs, immovable
properties, such as houses and factories, and all other things which are possessed. Human effort is a means to obtain the property
or its benefit. Therefore, wealth is the property (M ¯al) and the effort together. (Nabhani, 1997, p. 47).


----- p.34 (pdf 62) -----


34 Understanding Islamic Finance
rules for these contracts have also been defined in detail with the possibility of resolving any
contemporary issues through Ijtihad, subject to observance of allowed limits. These rules
allow man to utilize the resources by consuming them, benefiting from them or exchanging
them via a number of contracts like sale, loan, lease or gift. Rules pertaining to investment
of wealth/property have also been laid down.
Along with property rights, income and profit entitlement are established in Islamic
economics. This must occur through the effort, work or taking responsibility (Dham ¯an)
and distribution by means like partnership, trade, joint ventures, loans, various vehicles of
transfer incomes like grants and Zakat and the control of waste. Hence, the Islamic economy
has a linkage between the market functions of productive involvement and growth and the
institutional functions of policy and control.
2.5.2 Islamic Welfare Approach
The concept of welfare in Islam is neither exclusively materialistic nor absolutely spiritual.
It has rather dovetailed the spiritual and material aspects of life so that they may serve as a
source of mutual strength and as the foundation of true human welfare and happiness.
Study of the teachings of the Holy Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah leads us to some basic principles
of the economic system of Islam, which encourage human beings’ development, enforce
justice, stop exploitation and tend to set up a contented and satisfied society that can be
termed a real welfare society. In addition to achieving optimum produce in both public
and private sectors, allocation and distribution of resources and produce must take a course
that fulfils the basic human needs of all, irrespective of the colour, race and/or creed of
the people. The fulfilment of basic needs makes society tranquil, comfortable, healthy and
efficient, and able to contribute properly towards the realization and perpetuation of human
welfare. On account of the crucial importance of need fulfilment, it needs to be discussed
in detail.
As indicated above, the economic system of Islam tends to ensure the satisfaction of all
the basic needs (food, clothing and housing) of every individual, without any distinction, and
to provide resources to enjoy from living in a particular society. So individuals and society
are both important to make a contented and happy economy and society. All individuals are
linked with one another by certain relationships in social and economic dealings. Therefore,
the standard of living in an Islamic society has to be raised by securing the basic rights
for every individual in terms of need fulfilment side by side with enabling them to secure
comforts and prosperity.
In order to meet the basic needs of each and every member of a society, Islam urges all to
earn and seek the provisions for use by mankind. Islamic economy achieves this objective
by obliging each capable person to work, enabling him to fulfil his and his dependents’
basic needs. A number of verses of the Holy Qur’ ¯an and traditions of the holy Prophet
(pbuh) reveal that Islam obliges individuals to earn and use the wealth so as to develop
the economy for the betterment of society. It is the State’s responsibility to take measures
and adopt policies to enable those who are willing to work and anxious to work to find
employment.
The principle backed by self-interest alone as a secular core value is in direct conflict
with the core Islamic value of “moderation”, which would mean necessities of life together
with some comforts aimed at minimizing the hardships of life. Hence, items of luxury and
conspicuous consumption are not encouraged in the Islamic worldview of development.


----- p.35 (pdf 63) -----


Distinguishing Features of the Islamic Economic System 35
If some individuals are unable to earn and fulfil their needs, Shar ¯ı´ah obliges their fellow
beings – depending upon the nature of the relationship like neighbours, relatives, etc. – to
support them in fulfilling their basic needs. If there is nobody to support such people, Islam
obliges the State to be responsible for the support of all citizens, particularly mentally or
physically disabled people and the destitute. The holy Prophet has said: “The Imam (ruler)
is incharge (R ¯a‘iee) and he is responsible for his citizens.”
As regards basic needs, there is total agreement among Islamic economists that it is the
most important objective of the Islamic distributive policy. However, there may be some
difference of opinion as to which needs should be guaranteed and how these should be
fulfilled. Nevertheless, maximization of Falah (welfare in this world and the Hereafter) has
firm relevance with the Islamic concept of development, which can be achieved through
obedience to Allah (SWT) in worship (Ib ¯ad¯at) as well as Mu‘ ¯amal¯at, including all kinds
of economic activities related to production, consumption, exchange and distribution. As
long as seeking the pleasure of Allah is set as the final goal, the latter will be in perfect
conformity with the former.
This describes the contents of the Islamic welfare function, incorporating a collection
of value judgements covering all noble things in life. However, by going beyond material
welfare and for a reward in the world hereafter, these elements of the welfare function are
virtually impossible to quantify. That is what constitutes the greatest challenge for Islamic
economists. As pointed out by Umer Chapra:
“There is, however, no theoretical macroeconomic model that would show how the Islamic values
and institutions, and different sectors of the economy, society and polity would interact to help
realize the vision. /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiThe field where very little progress has been made is microeconomics. It has
not been possible to establish the relationship among the macroeconomic goals and the behaviour of
different economic agents and the kind of socio-economic and political reform that the realization
of goals may require.” 15
2.5.3 The Factors of Production
The Qur’ ¯anic injunctions on distribution of wealth help a lot in introducing a broader basis
of the distribution of income and wealth and require that in the process of distribution, none
of the factors of production is deprived of its share nor does it exploit any other. Land, labour
and capital jointly create value. As a result, the land-owner, the labourer and the owner of
capital should jointly share the produce. The distinctive feature of the Islamic system is that
capital has to bear the loss, if any. In addition to this, Islam compulsorily retains a portion
of the produced wealth as Zakat for those who are prevented from contributing their share
in production due to any social, physical or economic handicap.
Capitalism has four factors of production:
1. Capital – the produced means of production – its compensation is “interest”.
2. Land that includes all natural resources – things which are being used as means of
production without having previously undergone any process of human activity – its
compensation is the rent.
3. Labour – any effort or physical exertion on the part of human beings – its compensation
is wages.
15 Chapra, 2000b, pp. 21–37.


----- p.36 (pdf 64) -----


36 Understanding Islamic Finance
4. The entrepreneur or organization – which brings together the other three factors, makes
use of them and bears the risk of profit and loss in production – its compensation is
“profit”.
The factors of production in Islamic economics are:
1. Capital – includes those means of production which cannot be used in the process of
production until and unless they are either wholly consumed or completely altered in
form during the production process; it cannot fetch any rent. “Profit” is compensation
of capital in the Islamic framework, but it comes with responsibility or liability. So the
profit on any capital is the residual revenue of a business conducted with that capital after
making payment to all other parties; if the residual is negative, the capital owner has to
suffer a loss that is the shortfall in the principal employed in the business.
2. Land – all such means of production which are used in the process of production in
such a way that their corpus and original form remains unaltered. Their compensation
is rental; these can be lent or leased. For example, an owner of a factory would claim
rent of land and that of the installed machinery and plant; similarly, owners of houses,
vehicles, machines, etc. are entitled to rent.
3. Labour – that is, human exertion, whether physical or mental and also includes organi-
zation and planning. Its compensation is wages.
Profit, according to Islamic theory, is the result of the productivity of capital that an
entrepreneur has invested or a reward for his workmanship or for shouldering responsibility.
It is not a reward for capital or for enterprise per se . An entrepreneur who, for example,
brings together factors like land, labour, machinery and uses his own financial resources
(money capital), has to pay wages and rental for the use of land or machinery as per agreed
terms; he will make a profit on his capital or reward for his entrepreneurship only if there is
some residual after payment of the rental, wages and other expenses on raw materials, etc.
If the money capital is taken as a loan, the entrepreneur is bound to repay the same amount
of loan without any addition or shortfall, irrespective of the fact that he earned a profit or
incurred any loss in the business. In a case where the whole or a part of the money capital is
taken from anyone else who wants a profit on it, and the business suffers a loss, the money
capital would pro rata reduce and the provider of the capital would be obliged to accept the
shortfall or erosion of the whole amount. Therefore, a capital provider or an entrepreneur
is not entitled to profit simply by virtue of being a capital owner or an entrepreneur. All
participants in a joint business have similar rights and liabilities according to the nature of
the activity or the terms of the agreement.
The above discussion is suggestive of five factors of production, namely: land, capital,
labour, management and responsibility/liability. While land as a factor of production includes
all nonconsumable assets that can be rented, the concept of capital requires some detail.
This is so because of a different treatment of capital in the conventional economic theory
which narrows down the concept by restricting capital to borrowed money; hence its claim
on interest, which is discarded by Islam. Money itself is not recognized as capital and as
such it cannot earn a profit in itself. It cannot claim the rent as it is consumed and its
form changes when it is used. As the provider of funds is liable to loss, if any, he is an
entrepreneur as well. He will get a profit/loss for his capital and wages/remuneration for his
entrepreneurship/labour. If he does not manage the business himself and provides capital to
any other individual/group of individuals for any business, he will have a share in the profit
while the manager of the business will get “wages” in the form of a share in the profit. But


----- p.37 (pdf 65) -----


Distinguishing Features of the Islamic Economic System 37
if the business suffers a loss, the capital owner will bear the loss while the manager’s labour
will be wasted.
The responsibility to get a job done is also a factor; it may be taken by a single person
or a group of people joining together as business partners. A number of financers may join
together to contract a partnership and pursue any business of their choice, themselves or
through hired managers. They may also get the job done by signing subpartnerships with
other contractors or companies. They would all share the profits of such business. They may
also assign the job to big business organizations and firms to complete different jobs on an
offered bid price. The reward for taking the responsibility to coordinate the services and
supplies and get the work done according to the terms of the contract is also profit.
2.5.4 Restrained Individual Freedom
The “laissez faire” that is the basis of conventional economics has a built-in possibility
of distortions in the smooth functioning of the market economy, mainly on account of the
unbridled “profit motive” leading to a focus on enrichment without any care for the impact on
others or society. Even though the Great Depression and the resultant Keynesian revolution
tended to undermine this faith in the efficacy of market forces, the recent disenchantment
with a large government role in the economy has restored it and there is a call for liber-
alism or return, as early as possible, to the classical model with “minimum” government
intervention.16
State intervention with a secular approach cannot produce long-term solid results for
society either. This is because the “profit motive” in the absence of any ethical norms,
finds loopholes for misdeeds, injustice and corruption. Even socially undesirable professions
like gambling and sex-related industries become part and parcel of public policy, leading
to socio-economic problems as most capitalists invest their money in lucrative unhealthy
practices and not in socially desirable sectors like education, health, housing and commodity
producing sectors including agriculture and industry.
Islamic economics is not devoid of money matters, because those form the greater part
of any economy. However, it maintains a balance between production and consumption and
cares about distribution. It draws a line of demarcation between good and evil or lawful and
unlawful. The overall message that we derive from the literature on the philosophy and the
nature of the Islamic economic system is that it is a means to achieve development in terms of
complete human personality from all dimensions – material, world and ethical, of individuals
and of society as a whole. It pays due attention to causes, effects and consequences of
actions.
There are certain curbs and some checks imposed by Shar ¯ı´ah on consumers’ behaviour.
Individuals are not at large to exercise their own will in terms of choice. Some basic rules
have been laid down to govern intensity of wealth-gaining and income-consuming activities
of society. It does not stand neutral as regards ends and means. It is religion-based, valuation-
oriented, morality-judged and spiritually-bound. It is positive and normative science, as it
links materialistic and moralistic requirements of changing nature. Thus, the scope of Islamic
economics is the administration of scarce resources in human society in the light of the
ethical concept of welfare in Islam.
16 Chapra, 1992, p. 17.


----- p.38 (pdf 66) -----


38 Understanding Islamic Finance
All types of work except those leading to indecency or socio-economic loss to other
individuals and society are permissible. A basic principle of the Islamic legal system is that
an activity or a commodity that is not prohibited through the Shar ¯ı´ah texts is permissible.
Thus, man has to observe the prohibitions only. Islamic economics would mean undertaking
all activities individually or collectively that are not prohibited and that could add to the
welfare and happiness of human beings.
The most important prohibitions in the field of economics are the prohibition of interest,
hazard and gambling due to their extremely harmful impacts on society. Such limitations
are necessary for the fulfilment of the overall objectives of the Shar ¯ı´ah for making society
happy and satisfied, both materially and spiritually.
2.5.5 Liberalism versus State Intervention
The individual self-interest of conventional economics leads to maximization of wealth and
want satisfaction, independent of its impact on the rest of society. The concept of “positive-
ness” has been expressed in terms of unrestrained individual freedom, making economics
“entirely neutral between ends”. Further, it is believed that market forces will themselves
create “order” and “harmony”, and lead to “efficiency” and “equity”. The government should
hence abstain from intervening.
The concept of Pareto efficiency in conventional economics is based on the assumption
that the market will automatically take care of “equity” and that the market equilibrium will
be a Pareto optimum, leading to realization of normative goals at least in the long run. It
leads to the common belief of modern economics that any intervention in the framework of
Pareto optimality would lead to less efficient results. This framework is, however, based on
some assumptions like harmony between individual preferences and social interest, equal
distribution of income and wealth, a true reflection of the urgency of wants by prices and
perfect competition. Since no real world market is likely to satisfy these assumptions, there
is a considerable distortion in the expression of priorities in the markets. Hence, the Pareto
efficiency or Pareto optimality concept that generates conflict in society does not fit properly
in the philosophy of Islamic economics. It reflects a built-in bias against the realization of
normative goals if reliance is placed primarily on prices for allocation and distribution of
resources.17
Society is for the individuals who are responsible for their actions and accountable to the
one creator for their conduct. The individual has a right to participate in economic activities
for his sustenance and the tasks relating to social well-being, subject to the limitations and
injunctions of the Qur’ ¯an and the Sunnah. The crucial involvement of individuals for the
collective benefit of society has been aptly described by the holy Prophet (pbuh) in a parable,
as reported by Imam Bukhari in his “Sahih” and as given below:
“Those who accept and abide by the limits ordained by Allah and those who transgress may be
likened to two groups sharing a boat; one group occupying the upper deck and the other the hold.
Whenever those in the hold required water they had to go up to draw it. So they thought among
themselves; why not have a hole in the bottom and thus save inconvenience to those in the top?
Now if those on the top do not dissuade and prevent them, all are lost. If they do, all are saved.”
17 Chapra, 2000a, pp. 67, 68.


----- p.39 (pdf 67) -----


Distinguishing Features of the Islamic Economic System 39
This shows that society cannot remain as a silent spectator to any harmful act of individuals
and individual freedom does not imply unrestricted power to endanger the health of society
as a whole. Social authority in the form of the State is recognized by Islam for the prevention
of exploitation and moral degeneration as well as for the promotion of the material and
spiritual interests of men and women. The Holy Qur’ ¯an says: “O ye who believe! Obey
Allah, obey the Messenger and those of you who are in authority.” Thus, a purposeful
relationship based on goodwill and cooperation is found in the individual–State relationship.
The rulers cease to deserve obedience should they transgress the Shar ¯ı´ah. The holy Prophet
has said: “Obedience, (to rulers) is not valid where a disobedience to Allah is involved”.
As such, Islamic economics requires balanced growth in any society encompassing both
material and spiritual satisfaction of the individual as well as society. Material wealth, indus-
trial inventions, technological development, etc. are important factors in Islamic economics,
but the spiritual and social aspects like the patterns of relationships amongst human beings
and between man and God and the emerging perceptions about affairs of life are equally
important factors, leading to optimal realization of the objectives of the Islamic Shar ¯ı´ah.
The State can introduce necessary laws to ensure social justice and to put an end to economic
exploitation and oppression and the Holy Qur’ ¯an gives the Islamic State the necessary legal
authority to do so (see Qur’ ¯an; 22: 41).
The Islamic economic system gives an important overseeing role to the State and regulators
in order to create harmony between individuals and social benefits. Freedom available to
individuals for undertaking economic activities does not mean that anyone can engage in
trade and business that is harmful to society. Belief in one God and accountability in the life
Hereafter is the central point of all human activities, which can mainly be divided into the
rights of the Creator and the rights of fellow beings. All human beings are accountable to
Him in the Hereafter with regard to both types of rights and will be rewarded or punished
according to the individuals’ deeds without any injustice. 18
In an Islamic economy, the State is bound to take measures not to allow forces with vested
interests to distort the functioning of market forces. 19 A large number of references from the
Holy Qur’ ¯an and the Sunnah reveal that Islam has accepted the law of demand and supply
as a principle but has subjected it to some limitations to avoid any moral and social ills and
problems. The ultimate objective of an Islamic economy is to establish social justice. The
other objectives, such as best use of resources, freedom of work and business, meeting the
requirements of the deprived and establishing human dignity, etc. are only there to assist in
achieving the ultimate objective. Therefore, it is not lawful to allow the operation of such
economic activities that might disturb the balance and real and genuine economic and social
justice.
The literature on Islamic economics emphasizes four types of action by government in
economic life. These are:
1. Ensuring compliance with the Islamic code of conduct by individuals through education
and, whenever necessary, through compulsion.
2. The maintenance of healthy conditions in the market to ensure its proper functioning.
18 See Holy Qur’ ¯an, 2: 281.
19 See Chapra, 2000a, pp. 69–72.


----- p.40 (pdf 68) -----


40 Understanding Islamic Finance
3. Modification of the allocation of resources and distribution of income affected by the
market mechanism by guiding and regulating it as well as direct intervention and partic-
ipation, if needed, in the process.
4. Taking positive steps in the field of production and capital formation to accelerate growth.
The Islamic State can impose some limitations with a view to avoiding distortions and
keeping in mind the well-being of society as a whole. All members of a society, regardless
of differences in gender and religion, are allowed to undertake any of the permissible (Halal)
businesses, but this is subject to the condition that it should not harm others. Once the
Pious Caliph, Umar Farooq (Allah be pleased with him) asked a person who was selling a
commodity at a much lower price than the market price to increase the price/rate or to leave
the market.
Ibnul Qayyim has explained the functions of an Islamic State in the following words:
“Allah has sent down Prophets and revealed Books to establish justice which is the fundamental
and basic objective of the whole creation. Everything revealed by Allah proves that the ultimate
goal of revelation is the establishment of a just and balanced way of life. In whatever way the law
may be made it must aim at establishing justice and fair play. The most important thing is the
purpose and objective of law and not how it has been derived or enacted. But Allah, by giving us a
number of laws, has set examples and reasonable basis for framing and enacting laws. The lawful
government policies and directives are, therefore, considered a part of Shar ¯ı´ah and not a violation
of it. To define them as government policies is only a matter of terminology, but these are, in fact,
a part of Shar ¯ı´ah; the only condition is that such government policies and directives must be based
on justice and fair play.” (Il ¯amul Muwaqqi’in)
It is, therefore, established that the responsibility of the government is to maintain a
balance of economic activities and services. If the balance is distorted by economic agents
with vested interests, the State has to restore the balance. Qur’ ¯an’s disapproval of the
concentration of wealth (59: 7) and emphasis on justice (14: 90) is beyond any doubt. On
account of this, one of the important duties of an Islamic government will be to recover
wealth usurped through illegal means and return it to its genuine owners or to deposit it
with the State exchequer. For checking all irregularities, Islamic economics introduces the
institution of “Hisbah” that must be run by people of high integrity.
Umer Chapra has listed the following functions of the State in the field of economics and
finance:20
1. Eradication of poverty, maintaining law and order, ensuring full employment and achiev-
ing an optimum rate of growth.
2. Economic planning.
3. Ensuring social and economic justice.
4. Stability in the value of money. This is vitally important not only for the continued
long-term growth of an economy but also for social justice and economic welfare. The
Holy Qur’ ¯an says: “And give full measure and weight with justice” (6: 152). “So give
full measure and weight without defrauding men in their belongings and do not corrupt
the world after its reform” (7: 85; see also, 11: 84–85, 17: 35 and 26: 181). Money
being a measure of value, any continuous and significant erosion in its real value may be
interpreted in the light of the Qur’ ¯an to be tantamount to corrupting the world because of
20 Chapra, 1979, pp. 12–20.


----- p.41 (pdf 69) -----


Distinguishing Features of the Islamic Economic System 41
the adverse effect this erosion has on social justice and general welfare, which are among
the central goals of the Islamic system. In the mutually interdependent global economy
of today, it may not be fully possible for the small and open economy of an individual
Muslim country to achieve the desired stability. However, what it does imply is that an
Islamic state should itself be clear about its role with respect to price stability and should
be determined to contribute whatever it can to the attainment of that goal. 21
5. Harmonizing international relations and national defence. The Islamic State should
encourage and support any constructive move towards peace, and should honour all
treaties and agreements to which it is a partner. Nevertheless, it should do its utmost
to strengthen its defence so as to prevent or frustrate any aggression against its faith,
territory, freedom and resources. 22
As a corollary, governments and the central banks/monetary authorities would be required
to ensure that banking and non-banking financial institutions function smoothly and the
interests of all stakeholders, particularly small savers and the masses in general, were
protected and the cartels and monopolies did not exploit them. Regulators would also ensure
that the institutions did not get involved in antisocial activities injurious to individuals,
society and human beings at large.
Leaving the most strategic sector of money and finance to market forces without any
effective overseeing role is bound ultimately to generate disastrous effects for the long-term
health of economies. Governments/regulators must devise and adopt fiscal and monetary
policies in their respective ambits in such a way that an expected rate of return emerging
from real sector business in the economies becomes the benchmark and an effective signal
for the efficient allocation of funds to various sectors.
2.6 SUMMARY
Banking and finance are parts of economics or the economic system, as the rules governing
activities of banks and financial institutions stem from the overall economic framework in
which these institutions operate. It is, therefore, worthwhile to discuss the structure of Islamic
economics under which the Islamic financial system is supposed to work. In this chapter
we have discussed the fundamentals of the Islamic economic worldview having direct or
indirect impact upon the business of Islamic financial institutions and markets.
All economic and financial contracts in the framework of Islamic finance have to conform
to the Shar ¯ı´ah rules, with the objective of helping to achieve the well-being of people in
the worldly life as well as in the Hereafter. Hence, studying economics is important for the
dual purpose of having better sustenance and the religious imperatives. The sources of rules
dealing with economic aspects of human beings are the Holy Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah of His last
Messenger, Muhammad (pbuh). In addition to the Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah, Ijma‘a, Qiy ¯as and
Ijtihad provide a hierarchical framework of sources of rules governing Islamic economics
and finance.
21 Chapra considers that borrowing from the central bank should be the last resort, as it generates inflation unless accompanied by
a corresponding increase in the supply of goods and services. However, according to the principle that a smaller sacrifice may be
imposed to avoid a larger sacrifice and that the smaller of two evils may be tolerated, borrowing from the central bank may also
be defended under certain special circumstances, even if there is no corresponding rise in output. Also see Chapra, 1985.
22 See Holy Qur’ ¯an; (8: 60) and (2: 190).


----- p.42 (pdf 70) -----


42 Understanding Islamic Finance
Islam has provided basic principles for the economic activities of human beings. In the
Middle Ages, Muslim scholars provided the driving force behind the then economic activities
and cultural life. Contemporary Islamic economists have discussed almost all areas of modern
economics; but all these are segments that need to be put together into a comprehensive
model.
Profit, according to Islamic theory, is the result of the productivity of capital that an
entrepreneur has invested or a reward for his workmanship or for shouldering responsibility.
As capital provider he has to bear the loss, if any, and as entrepreneur he has to pay the
wages, rentals and other expenses and gets the residual, if any. All participants in a joint
business have similar rights and liabilities according to the nature of the activity or the terms
of the agreement.
Islamic rules of economics make it binding for human beings not only to abide by the
Shar¯ı´ah tenets relating to dos and don’ts but also to keep in mind the impact of their
activities on others and society as a whole. To realize the goal, the State should facilitate
business in such a way that various stakeholders and parties involved do not exploit each
other. To ensure that the basic needs of all are fulfilled, it should try to maintain socio-
economic justice and to control the wants of the people through a filtering process, motivate
the people to abstain from activities injurious to others and restructure the system for transfer
of resources from one use/sector to others to ultimately realize the dual objective of balanced
growth with need fulfilment.
Islam adopts a balanced approach between an individual’s freedom and the well-being
of society. It likes the market mechanism to balance the demand and supply of goods for
the dispensation of economic justice, the ultimate benefit of society and for the efficient
allocation of resources. All efforts made for self-interest which are not in harmony with
social interests are antisocial activities and, therefore, not allowed. In other words, for the
smooth functioning of the global economic system and welfare of mankind, there is a need
to reform the institutional set-up to the effect that private and social interests coincide. This
is feasible only if the socio-economic system of all societies is organized such that fair
dealing is ensured with all factors of production and that all channels of unjust earnings are
effectively closed.
For the smooth and proper functioning of the banking and finance sectors, governments
and regulators should be obliged to perform an effective overseeing role to ensure that
market forces and different stakeholders do not exploit one another. For justice, fairness and
the longer term health of the system, they have to ensure that monetary growth is “adequate”
and not “excessive” or “deficient”.

