
----- p.43 (pdf 71) -----


3
The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics in
Islamic Economics and Finance
3.1 INTRODUCTION
In the previous chapter we discussed the main features of Islamic economics and the Islamic
economic system, with the objective of distinguishing them from conventional economics.
Now we proceed to discuss the fundamentals of Islamic business and finance, including
the basic prohibitions, encouragements, norms and ethics governing economic and business
activities in the framework of the Shar ¯ı´ah.
Islam has constrained the freedom to engage in business and financial transactions on
the basis of a number of prohibitions, ethics and norms. Besides some major prohibitions,
Islamic law has prescribed a number of other norms and boundaries in order to avoid
inequitable gains and injustice. As Shar ¯ı´ah compliance is the raison d’etre of the Islamic
financial system, concern for the Shar ¯ı´ah tenets should dominate all other concerns of
Islamic financial institutions. It is only through the compliance of Islamic banking operations
with the norms and the principles of the Shar ¯ı´ah that the system can develop on a sustainable
basis and can ensure fairness for investors, the business community and institutions.
This chapter is organized to include discussion of the major prohibitions and norms that
determine the overall limitations, working beyond which would create Shar ¯ı´ah compliance
problems for Islamic financial institutions and observance of which is necessary for the
integrity and credibility of the Islamic finance movement. The prohibitions that we shall
discuss here include that of Riba, commonly known as “interest” in conventional commercial
terminology, Maisir and Qim ¯ar (gambling) and Gharar or excessive uncertainty about the
subject matter and/or the price in exchanges and the norms and ethics of business and
finance in the Islamic framework. These norms and ethics require that all economic agents
in a society must avoid injustice and unfair dealing with others and that harm should not
be inflicted upon anyone. Invalid contracts on account of any contractual deficiencies are
not the subject of this chapter but will be discussed in Chapter 5. Similarly, principles and
features of Islamic banking and the financial system will be discussed separately in the next
chapter.
3.2 THE BASIC PROHIBITIONS
As a rule, Islamic law does not recognize transactions that have a proven illegitimate factor
and/or object. For that purpose, Shar ¯ı´ah has identified some elements which are to be
avoided in commerce or business transactions. In this regard, the prohibition of Riba, Gharar
and gambling is the most strategic factor that defines invalid and voidable contracts and
demarcates the overall limits which should not be crossed. We will elaborate upon these one
by one.


----- p.44 (pdf 72) -----


44 Understanding Islamic Finance
3.2.1 Prohibition of Riba
It is important to observe at the very beginning that there is no difference of opinion among
Muslims about the prohibition of Riba and all Muslim sects consider indulgence in Riba-
based transactions a severe sin. This is because the primary sources of Shar ¯ı´ah, i.e. the
Holy Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah, strongly condemn Riba. However, there have been differences
regarding the meaning of Riba or what constitutes Riba, which must be avoided for the
conformity of economic activities to the tenets of the Shar ¯ı´ah.
There are a number of myths and much confusion, even among devoted and pious Muslims.
While some liberal Muslims consider that commercial interest is not Riba prohibited by
Islam, many pious and devoted Muslims have the belief that any prefixed return in all types
of transactions is Riba and therefore prohibited. Many in the business community consider
that in Islamic banking, costless money should be available. A number of economists and
policymakers believe that the profit margin on credit sales by Islamic banks resembles Riba.
These myths have to be removed, particularly among the three main stakeholders, i.e.
Shar¯ı´ah scholars, academicians and bankers. If they properly understand and accordingly
educate the masses, only then will people in general have firm confidence about the concepts
and the working of the new system. Therefore, besides the prohibition of Riba, we will
discuss the connotation of Riba to explain what types of transactions Islamic banks have to
avoid.
Prohibition of Riba in the Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah
A number of verses of the Holy Qur’ ¯an expressly prohibit Riba. Although some indications
of displeasure against Riba were given in the Makkah period, the express prohibition was
imposed by Islam sometime before the battle of ’Uhad in the year 3 AH. 1 Final and repeated
prohibition came in the year 10 AH, about two weeks before the passing away of the holy
Prophet (pbuh). From the Holy Qur’ ¯an, verses on Riba in order of revelation are given
below:
• Surah al-Rum, verse 39
“That which you give as Riba to increase the people’s wealth increases not with God;
but that which you give in charity, seeking the goodwill of God, multiplies manifold.”
(30: 39)
• Surah al-Nisa’, verse 161
“And for their taking Riba although it was forbidden for them, and their wrongful
appropriation of other people’s property. We have prepared for those among them who
reject faith a grievous punishment.” (4: 161)
• Surah Al-e-Imran, verse 130
“O believers, take not doubled and redoubled Riba, and fear Allah so that you may
prosper. Fear the fire which has been prepared for those who reject faith, and obey Allah
and the Prophet so that you may get mercy.” (3: 130)
(This verse contains a clear prohibition for Muslims and it can firmly be said that it is
the first verse of the Holy Qur’ ¯an through which the practice of Riba was forbidden for
Muslims in express terms. This was sometime around the battle of ’Uhad). 2
1 Ibn Hajar, 1981, 8, p. 205.
2 Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, Justice Taqi Usmani’s part, paras 11–24.


----- p.45 (pdf 73) -----


The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics 45
• Surah al-Baqarah, verses 275–281
— “Those who take Riba shall be raised like those who have been driven to madness
by the touch of the Devil; this is because they say: ‘Trade is just like interest’ while
God has permitted trade and forbidden interest. Hence those who have received the
admonition from their Lord and desist, may keep their previous gains, their case being
entrusted to God; but those who revert, shall be the inhabitants of the fire and abide
therein forever.” (275)
— “Allah deprives Riba of all blessing but blesses charity; He loves not the ungrateful
sinner.” (276)
— “O, believers, fear Allah, and give up what is still due to you from Riba if you are
true believers.” (278)
— “If you do not do so, then take notice of war from Allah and His Messenger. But,
if you repent, you can have your principal. Neither should you commit injustice nor
should you be subjected to it.” (279)
— “And if the debtor is in misery, let him have respite until it is easier, but if you forego
it as charity, it is better for you if you realize.” (280)
— “And be fearful of the Day when you shall be returned to the Allah, then everybody
shall be paid in full what he has earned and they shall not be wronged.” (281)
The above verses indicate the clear prohibition of Riba. Verses of Surah al-Baqarah, given in
bullet point 4 above, not only describe the prohibition of Riba, but also give a comprehensive
principle for determining whether a transaction involves Riba or not. About the background of
the revelation of verses 278 and 279 of this set of Qur’ ¯anic tenets, Shaikh Taqi Usmani says:
“After the conquest of Makkah, the holy Prophet (pbuh) had declared as void all the amounts of Riba
that were due at that time. The declaration embodied that nobody could claim any interest on any loan
advanced by him. Then the holy Prophet (pbuh) proceeded to Taaif, which could not be conquered,
but later on the inhabitants of Taaif, who belonged mostly to the tribe of Thaqif, came to him and after
embracing Islam surrendered to the holy Prophet (pbuh) and entered into a treaty with him. One of the
proposed clauses of the treaty was that Banu Thaqif would not forego the amounts of interest due on
their debtors but their creditors would forego the amounts of interest. The holy Prophet (pbuh) instead
of signing that treaty simply ordered to write a sentence on the proposed draft that Banu Thaqif will
have the same rights as other Muslims have. Banu Thaqif, having the impression that their proposed
treaty was accepted by the holy Prophet (pbuh), claimed the amount of interest from Banu Amr Ibn-
al-Mughirah, but they declined to pay interest on the ground that Riba was prohibited after embracing
Islam. The matter was placed before Attaab ibn Aseed (God be pleased with him), the Governor of
Makkah. Banu Thaqif argued that according to the treaty they were not bound to forego the amounts
of interest. Attaab ibn Aseed placed the matter before the holy Prophet (pbuh) on which the following
verses of Surah al-Baqarah were revealed:
‘O those who believe, fear Allah and give up what still remains of the Riba if you are believers.
But if you do not do so, then listen to the declaration of war from Allah and His Messenger.
And if you repent, yours is your principal. Neither you wrong, nor be wronged.’ (278–279)
At that point of time, Banu Thaqif surrendered and said that they had no power to wage war against
Allah and his Messenger”. 3
3 Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, Justice Taqi Usmani’s part of Judgement, paras 23, 24, pp. 528, 529; quoting from Ibn Jarir,
Jami-al-Bayan, 3: 107; Al-Wahidi, Alwasit, 1: 397 and Al-Wahidi, Asbab-al-Nuzool, Riyadh, 1984, p. 87.


----- p.46 (pdf 74) -----


46 Understanding Islamic Finance
A large number of traditions of the holy Prophet (pbuh) pertain to various aspects of Riba,
like its prohibition, the severity of its sin and its forms. For the sake of brevity, we will give
here only some of them to derive important implications and rules relating to transactions in
the present age. In line with the verses of the Holy Qur’ ¯an, the following Ah ¯adith (traditions)
of the holy Prophet (pbuh) reiterate the prohibition of Riba:
1. From Jabir (Gbpwh): “The Prophet (pbuh) cursed the receiver and the payer of interest,
the one who records it and the witnesses to the transaction and said: ‘They are all alike
[in guilt]’.” 4
2. From Anas ibn Malik (Gbpwh): “The Prophet said: ‘When one of you grants a loan
and the borrower offers him a dish, he should not accept it; and if the borrower offers
a ride on an animal, he should not ride, unless the two of them have been previously
accustomed to exchanging such favours mutually’.” 5
3. Zaid B. Aslam reported that interest in pagan times was of this nature: “When a person
owed money to another man for a certain period and the period expired, the creditor
would ask: ‘you pay me the amount or pay the extra’. If he paid the amount, it was well
and good, otherwise the creditor increased the loan amount and extended the period for
payment again.” 6
4. The holy Prophet (Pbuh) announced the prohibition of Riba in express terms at the
occasion of his last Hajj, which was the most attended gathering of his Companions.
The Prophet said: “Every form of Riba is cancelled; capital indeed is yours which you
shall have; wrong not and you shall not be wronged. Allah has given His Commandment
totally prohibiting Riba. I start with the amount of Riba which people owe to my uncle
Abbas and declare it all cancelled”. He then, on behalf of his uncle, cancelled the total
amount of Riba due on his loan capital from his debtors. 7
5. The holy Prophet (Pbuh) said, “Gold for gold, silver for silver, wheat for wheat, barley for
barley, dates for dates and salt for salt – like for like, equal for equal, and hand to hand;
if the commodities differ, then you may sell as you wish, provided that the exchange is
hand to hand.” 8
6. Bilal (Gbpwh) once visited the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) with some high quality dates,
the Prophet (pbuh) inquired about their source. Bilal explained that he traded two volumes
of lower quality dates for one volume of that of the higher quality. The Prophet (pbuh)
said: “This is precisely the forbidden Riba! Do not do this. Instead, sell the first type of
dates, and use the proceeds to buy the others.” 9
7. A man deputed by the holy Prophet (pbuh) for the collection of Zakat/Ushr from Khyber
brought for him dates of very fine quality. Upon the Prophet’s asking him whether all the
dates of Khyber were such, the man replied that this was not the case and added that he
exchanged a Sa‘a (a measure) of this kind for two or three (of the other kind). The holy
Prophet replied: “Do not do so. Sell (the lower quality dates) for dirhams and then use
4 Muslim, Kitab al-Musaqat, Bab la‘ni akili al-riba wa mu‘kilihi; also in Tirmidhi and Musnad Ahmad.
5 Baihaqi, 1344 H, Kitab al-Buyu’, Bab kulli qardin jarra manfa‘atan fa huwa riban.
6 Malik, 1985 chapter on Riba fiddayn (No. 418), Tradition No. 1362, p. 427.
7 Al-Khazin, 1955, 1, p. 301.
8 Muslim, 1981, Kitab al Musaqat, chapter on Riba.
9 Ibid.


----- p.47 (pdf 75) -----


The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics 47
the dirhams to buy better quality dates. (When dates are exchanged against dates) they
should be equal in weight.” 10
Riba in Loans/Debts
From the above references from the Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah we can derive a number of results
regarding the severity of the sin of Riba, its forms and its connotation. First, indulging in
Riba-based transactions is tantamount to being at war with Allah (SWT) and His Messenger,
which no one should even think of. Not only the lenders but also borrowers and other
parties involved commit sin by paying interest or by giving a helping hand in interest-
based business. If a destitute is constrained to borrow on interest in case of compulsion
to fulfil his basic food needs, there is the possibility of granting limited permission to
borrow on interest. But a person who takes advantage of interest-based loans for luxuri-
ous consumption or for the development of his businesses is culpable as per the above
tenets.
What the Qur’ ¯anic verses have discussed is the Riba on loans and debts. As is discussed
in detail in Chapter 5, a loan (Qard) is any commodity or amount of money taken from
any other person with liability to return or pay back the same or similar commodity or
amount of money when demanded back by the creditor. A debt (Dayn) is a liability to
pay which results from any credit transaction like a purchase/sale on credit or due rentals
in Ijarah (leasing). The amount of debt has to be paid back at a stipulated time and the
creditor (in case of debt) has no right to demand payment of the debt before the mutually
agreed time. The principle that the Holy Qur’ ¯an has given in verses 2: 278 and 279 is that
in both loans and debts, the creditor has the right to the Ra’asul-m ¯al (principal amount)
only; in the former case, exactly the amount given as the loan and in the latter case, the
liability or the amount of debt generated from the credit transaction. Any amount, big or
small, over and above the principal of loan or debt would be Riba. As conventional banks’
financing falls into the category of loans on which they charge a premium, it falls under
the purview of Riba as prohibited by the Holy Qur’ ¯an. As such, there should be no doubt
that commercial interest as in vogue is Riba in the light of the principle given by the Holy
Qur’¯an.
The word “Riba”, meaning prohibited gain, has been explained in the Holy Qur’ ¯an by
juxtaposing it against (profit from) sale. It explains that all income and earnings, salaries and
wages, remuneration and profits, usury and interest, rent and hire, etc. can be categorized
either as:
• profit from trade and business along with its liability – which is permitted; or
• return on cash or a converted form of cash without bearing liability in terms of the result
of deployed cash or capital – which is prohibited.
Riba, according to the criterion, would include all gains from loans and debts and anything
over and above the principal of loans and debts and covers all forms of “interest” on
commercial or personal loans. As such, conventional interest is Riba. It is interest or Riba
on loans and debts which we discuss in detail below.
10 Ibid.


----- p.48 (pdf 76) -----


48 Understanding Islamic Finance
How to Distinguish
The question arises, how does one distinguish between various types of transactions to judge
their permissibility or prohibition? The answer lies in differentiating the contracts on the
basis of their nature; all real sector business transactions involve:
1. Sale/purchase that may be either cash or credit.
2. Loaning.
3. Leasing.
When executed, these transactions have different implications in respect of transfer of
ownership, risk and liability.
In Bai‘, or sale, ownership of the commodity being sold is transferred to the buyer just
at the time the sale is executed and this transfer is definite and permanent. It makes no
difference whether the payment of the price is on the spot or deferred. This ownership
transfer is against on-the-spot or credit payment that may also involve a profit margin for
the seller. In the case of Salam, a special kind of forward sale, although goods have to be
delivered at a future stipulated time, both parties are obliged to give/take ownership at a
specified time on agreed terms, irrespective of whether the price rises or falls at the time of
delivery. If the transaction is that of a gift (Hibah), ownership of assets will transfer there
and then on a permanent basis free of any payment.
A loan, which is always free of any charge in Islamic finance, leads to the temporary
transfer of ownership of goods/assets free of any payment, meaning that the debtor is liable
to return or pay back the same asset to the creditor. Riba (in loans or debts) also means
the temporary transfer of ownership of goods/assets, but that transfer involves payment of
interest, which is prohibited.
Ijarah is a totally different transaction in that ownership of the leased asset does not transfer
and only the usufruct of the asset is made available to the lessee against the payment of rent.
As ownership remains with the lessor, he is entitled to rental and is also liable for expenses
relating to ownership and loss of the asset, if any. It is important to observe, however, that
anything which cannot be used without consuming its corpus, or which changes its shape
altogether in the process of its use, cannot be leased out, this includes yarn, money, edibles,
fuel, etc. Yarn, when used, takes the form of cloth; it can be bought and sold but not leased.
That is why, in Islamic finance, taking rent on leasing of assets like houses, vehicles, etc. is
permissible while charging rent on money is prohibited.
Hence, we have to determine whether a transaction is that of a sale or a loan; and if it is
a credit sale, at what time the sale transaction is executed and generates a debt, after which
the seller will not be in a position to charge any addition over the price. Verse 2: 275 of
the Holy Qur’ ¯an has very important implications in respect of payment of debts/liabilities
arising from credit transactions. It reports the usurers saying: “The sale is very similar to
Riba.” Their objection was that one can increase the price of a commodity in the original
transaction of sale because of its being based on a deferred payment, which is treated as
a valid sale. But if they add to the due amount after the maturity date and the debtor is
not able to pay, it is termed Riba, while the increase in both cases is similar. 11 The Holy
11 This is specifically mentioned by famous exegetist Ibn-abi-H ¯atim in his Tafsir, 1997, p. 545. Sayyuti and Ibne Jarir Tabari have
also reported a similar situation of Riba involvement in which a person sold any commodity on credit; when the payment was due
and the purchaser could not repay that, the price was enhanced and the time for payment extended (Sayyuti, 2003 and Tabari, n.d.,
p. 8).


----- p.49 (pdf 77) -----


The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics 49
Qur’¯an’s reply to the above approach is that “God has permitted trading and prohibited
Riba,” meaning that so long as price is not stipulated, parties can bargain; once the sale is
executed and liability in the form of a payable price determined, this becomes a debt which
has to be paid without any increase or further income to the seller.
The principle that anything over and above the amount of loans and debts amounts to Riba
is also proved by the above tradition numbers 2 and 3. While the second tradition prohibits
one from taking even a small benefit from the debtor, the latter indicates that debt liability
cannot increase in the case of a payment default by the debtor. Tradition number 3 reflects
both the cases of simple loans and debts arising from credit transactions. One can bargain
on price keeping in mind the credit period given for payment of the price, but when the
credit price is settled and liability generated, the principle is the same for loans or debts –
there should be no increase over the receivable amount.
On the basis of the clear text of the Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah as given above, the word “interest”
is now commonly understood as Riba, although Riba is a much wider term than “interest”.
While “interest”, which is a monetary charge levied for the use of money for the sake of
money, is always Riba, the latter (Riba) is not restricted to only interest. Riba also applies
to nonmonetary exchanges and includes sale/exchange transactions, which has important
implications even today, particularly in respect of foreign exchange transactions. This we
shall explain in the following sections.
Some Misconceptions
Owing to the fact that interest is a focal point in modern economic life, and especially
that it is embedded in the operations of existing financial institutions, a number of scholars
have been interpreting it in a manner which is radically different from the understanding
of the majority of Muslim scholars throughout the history of Islam and that is also sharply
in conflict with the categorical statements of the holy Prophet (pbuh). Islam accepts no
distinction, in so far as prohibition is concerned, between “reasonable” and “exorbitant”
rates of interest and thus what came to be regarded as the difference between usury and
interest, or between returns or bonuses on loans for consumption and those for production
purposes and so on. 12 Below, we briefly give some misgivings and their possible replies.
According to some scholars only a specific form of Riba, i.e. Riba al-jahiliyyah that was
prevalent at the time the Holy Qur’ ¯an was revealed, falls under the Qur’ ¯anic prohibition. Riba
al-jahiliyyah, according to them, was when the lender asked the borrower at the maturity
date if he would settle the debt or swap it for another larger debt of longer maturity period. 13
The difference between the maturity value of the old and new debt amounted to Riba. These
scholars say that if some charge is added to the loan at the very beginning, it will not be
Riba. This is, however, not correct, as a number of forms of Riba were prevalent in the
pre-Islamic period, including addition over loans and debts, and all of them were prohibited
by Islam.
It may be noted that even if we accept that only the stated form of Riba was present, the
conventional system of time-based compounding of debt still clearly falls into that category.
Interest on loans/deposits as applied by conventional banks is rather worse than that form of
12 Translation of the Holy Qur’ ¯an by Ali, 1989, p. 115.
13 Ahmad, 1995. For a rejoinder to this paper, see Journal of Islamic Banking and Finance , Karachi, January–March, 1996,
pp. 7–34.


----- p.50 (pdf 78) -----


50 Understanding Islamic Finance
Riba which was charged only when the borrower was not able to return the loan at maturity,
as present-day interest is charged both at the beginning when the transaction is executed and
in the case of overdue payments.
Sometimes it is misunderstood that only a high rate of interest is prohibited and any
normal charge on loans or debts does not come under the purview of prohibition. On the
basis of verse 3: 130 (given earlier) it is argued that a loan involves Riba only if it carries
the condition of doubling and redoubling, and the word “Riba” refers only to usurious loans
on which an excessive rate of interest is charged by the creditors, which entails exploitation.
It is added that modern banking interest cannot be termed “Riba” as the rate of interest is
not excessive or exploitative.
However, the argument is not tenable as per the tenets of the Holy Qur’ ¯an. The Qur’ ¯an
makes it very clear that in a loan transaction, and for that matter a trade transaction culminat-
ing in a debt contract, any addition chargeable to the principal amount is Riba. The Qur’ ¯an
says: “If you repent, then you have your principal only”. Believers have been ordered to
give up whatever amount of Riba is outstanding. Otherwise they will be considered at war
with Allah and his Prophet (pbuh). Further, “rate” is a relative term and any rate will, over
time, double and redouble the principal; hence, any addition over the amount of debt per se
is prohibited, irrespective of the rate. 14
Exegetist Ibne Jarir Tabari, while explaining verse (2: 279) says that creditors are entitled
to only the original amount of debt without any addition or profit. 15 Daaera-e-Maarif al
Islami (the Encyclopaedia of Islam in Urdu ) has given a convincing argument to clarify this
confusion: “Allah says in Surah Al-M ¯aidah ‘and sell not Signs of Allah for a low price’
(5: 44). Would this mean that selling the Signs of Allah for a high price is permissible?
Definitely not! Similarly, the verse 3: 130 will not permit one to charge any rate or anything
over and above the principal of a receivable.” 16
It is also argued by a few that Umar the Great (Gbpwh) stated that the Prophet (pbuh)
passed away before giving any specific direction with regard to differences of opinion about
the meaning of Riba. The Shariat Appellate Bench (SAB) of the Supreme Court of Pakistan
has discussed this issue in detail in its judgement and concluded that Umar the Great (Gbpwh)
had not even the slightest doubt about the prohibition of Riba Al-Nasiah that is involved in
all types of modern commercial laws. 17
In addition, it is argued that there was no commercial interest in Arabia at the time of
revelation of the Holy Qur’ ¯an; only a particular form (may be on consumption loans) was
prohibited. This also is not correct. The SAB has elaborated upon this aspect in detail, as
evidenced by some of their findings that we reproduce below:
“It is not to say that commercial or productive loans were not in vogue when Riba was prohibited.
More than enough material has now come on the record to prove that commercial and productive
loans were not foreign to the Arabs, and that loans were advanced for productive purposes both
before and after the advent of Islam.
All kinds of commercial, industrial and agricultural loans advanced on the basis of interest
were prevalent in the Byzantine Empire ruling in Syria, to the extent that Justinian, the Byzantine
14 For details see Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, pp. 557–564; Zaman, 1966, pp. 8–12.
15 Tabari, n.d., pp. 26, 27.
16 University of the Punjab, 1973, 10, p. 172.
17 Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, pp. 539–543.


----- p.51 (pdf 79) -----


The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics 51
Emperor (527–565 AD) had to promulgate a law determining the rates of interest which could be
charged from different types of borrowers.
The Arabs, especially of Makkah, had constant business relations with Syria, one of the most
civilized provinces of the Byzantine Empire. The Arab trade caravans used to export goods to and
import other goods from Syria.
The above material is more than enough to prove that the concept of commercial loans was not
alien to the holy Prophet (pbuh) or his companions when Riba was prohibited. Therefore, it is
not correct to say that the prohibition of Riba was restricted to consumption loans only and it did
not refer to commercial loans.
The SAB concluded:
“It is thus clear that the permissibility of interest can neither be based on the financial position
of the debtor nor on the purpose for which money is borrowed, and therefore, the distinction
between consumption loans and productive loans in this respect is contrary to the well-established
principles”.18
Some people favour an interest-based system on the basis of the “Principle of Necessity”.
However, adverse impacts of interest on the world economy in general and the economies
of developing countries in particular imply that it is the biggest threat to the developing
economies, a belief also held by many renowned economists. 19
Interest is sometimes legalized on account of inflation and decreases in the purchasing
power of lent money. This is also not a valid argument. When any currency depreciates, it
makes no difference whether it is in the pocket of someone who has lent some money or it
is with the borrower/debtor – depreciation equally affects money in the pocket of a person
and money with the person to whom he has given the credit. If a person lends for the reason
that the money in his pocket will lose its value while lending, i.e. it would be beneficial for
him on account of indexation, this would also involve interest on the basis of the rule that
all loans that seek benefit involve Riba. Therefore, indexation of financial obligations also
leads to Riba. 20
Finally, the supporters of interest argue that today’s debtors are not poor people; charging
interest from them is not unjust. However, this argument strengthens the case against interest
because the relatively richer class takes funds at cheaper rates vis-à-vis their profits. They
give a small part of the profit in the form of interest to the banks, which is treated as an
expense and ultimately charged to the consumers. Thus, the rich become richer leaving
the poor poorer. If some of them incur loss, they are bound to suffer that loss. To avoid
this they often resort to unethical practices, causing harm to society as a whole. Interest
leads to exploitation by any of the parties, i.e. debtor or creditor, and hence it is prohibited
irrespective of who is the exploiter in any particular transaction. The conventional financial
system has become a means for exploiting savers or depositors and the general public.
Riba in Sale/Exchange Transactions
The last three traditions given above relate to the prohibition of Riba in sale or exchange
contracts. In particular, the fifth tradition forms the basis of elaborate juristic rules on Riba
18 Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, pp. 546–557.
19 Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, pp. 194–195.
20 For details on this aspect, see the work by the following authors: Federal Shariat Court, 1992, paras 154–234; Hasanuz Zaman,
1993.


----- p.52 (pdf 80) -----


52 Understanding Islamic Finance
prohibition in sale contracts and other exchange transactions. This type of Riba is termed
“Riba Al-Fadl”.
Exchange rules are different for different contracts and types of assets. We have briefly
discussed contracts in the preceding section. Assets could be consumables, durables, mon-
etary units or media of exchange like gold, silver or other currencies, shares representing
pools of assets, etc. Goods other than monetary units are traded on market-based pricing.
Gold, silver or any monetary units (Athman) are governed by specific rules that have been
discussed by jurists under the caption of Bai‘ al Sarf (sale of Athman). Usufructs and services
are covered by the rules of Ijarah or Ujrah (leasing/hiring of services). Loans and debts are
governed by the rules relating to their repayment and assignment.
The well-known Hadith on the exchange of six commodities and the other traditions about
the exchange of low quality dates for a lesser amount of better quality dates deal with Riba
in exchange transactions and have far-reaching implications in respect of business activities
in the Islamic framework. Later jurists have extended the scope of this kind of Riba to other
commodities on the basis of analogical reasoning (Qiy ¯as) and the ‘Illah (effective cause) of
prohibition.
According to the rules of exchange of monetary units (Bai‘ al Sarf), if any article is
sold for an article of the same kind, the exchange must be on the spot (without delay) and
the articles must be equal in weight. In this context, jurists have held lengthy discussions,
keeping in mind the two types of ‘Illah that play an effective role in the exchange: the unit
of value (Thamaniyyah) and the edibility. The commentator of Sahih Muslim, Imam Nawavi
has summarized these rules in the following way:
• When the underlying ‘Illah of the two goods being exchanged is different, shortfall/excess
and delay both are permissible, e.g. the exchange of gold for wheat or dollars for a car.
• When the commodities of exchange are similar, excess and delay both are prohibited,
e.g. gold for gold or wheat for wheat, dollars for dollars, etc. 21
• When the commodities of exchange are heterogeneous but the ‘Illah is the same, as in the
case of exchanging gold for silver or US Dollars for Japanese Yen (medium of exchange)
or wheat for rice (the ‘Illah being edibility), then excess/deficiency is allowed, but delay
in exchange is not allowed.
In the present scenario, the major ‘Illah, or cause, on the basis of which one may extend
the rules of Riba to other commodities by analogy is their being used in lieu of money.
There is consensus among scholars that the rules of Riba apply to anything that serves the
function of money. This may be gold, silver, any paper currency or IOUs.
Connotation of the Term Riba
On the basis of the above detailed discussion, we are now in a position to explain what
the term Riba connotes in the perspective of present-day business and finance. The literal
meaning of Riba is excess and in the terminology of the Shar ¯ı´ah, it means an addition,
however slight, over and above the principal of a loan or debt. Nasiah means delay or
delaying the delivery of a commodity in a contract. The term Riba Al-Nasiah, therefore,
21 The nature of the transaction must be kept in mind; this prohibition is for business or sale transactions. Nonremunerative contracts
(Uqood Ghair Mu‘awadha) like Qard and Dayn are exempt from this rule.


----- p.53 (pdf 81) -----


The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics 53
means the benefit or excess that arises from the delay of counter value in an exchange based
on loans or sales. More precisely, it is the potential benefit to be derived during the period
of delay stipulated for either of the exchanged/counter currency values. Riba Al-Nasiah
relates to loan transactions and is also termed Riba Al-Qur’ ¯an. Riba Al-Fadl that relates to
exchange/sale transactions is the quality premium in the exchange of low quality for better
quality goods of the same genus, e.g. in the exchange of dates for dates, wheat for wheat, etc.
Hence, Riba includes both usury and interest as used in modern commercial terminology.
The word “interest” by and large has now been accepted and is understood as Riba. Con-
ventional banks’ loan transactions carrying interest involve both Riba Al-Nasiah and Riba
Al-Fadl – an extra amount of money is paid at the time when payment becomes due as per
the loan contract.
Keeping in mind all types of transaction, a broader definition of Riba would be the
following:
“Riba means and includes any increase over and above the principal amount payable in a contract
obligation, not covered by a corresponding increase in labour, commodity, risk or expertise.”
This definition requires that all accruals should correspond to liability and risk and excludes
from Riba the profit charged in trading and Shirkah, commission or service charged in Ujrah
and Wakalah and the rentals charged in Ijarah.
The definition of Riba by Justice Wajihuddin Ahmad, a member of the Shariat Appellate
Bench of the Supreme Court of Pakistan, which he indicated in his separate part of judgement,
is worth mentioning:
“Riba in Islam encompasses every return and all excess arising purely in consideration of time
allowed for the use of money or of any other thing of value lent as also every such increase on
goods exchanged violative of any or all of the mandates of saw’am-bi-sawaa’ (meaning equal for
equal), Mithlam-bi-mithlin (like for like) and Yadam-bi-yadin (hand to hand or on the spot), where
the exchange, subject to the ah ¯adith, is of like commodities for at least that in Yadam-bi-yadin, if
such exchange be in dissimilar articles.” 22
Prohibition of Riba in Other Revealed Religions
It is pertinent to observe that Islam is not alone in prohibiting Riba. The institution of interest
is repugnant to the teachings of all revealed religions and from the purely religious point of
view, there have never been two views about its prohibition. Similarly, none of the revealed
religions has accepted “interest” as the cost of using capital as commonly understood in
conventional economics. A detailed discussion of the tenets of various religions on Riba is
not the purpose of this chapter. We shall refer to this aspect only briefly.
Debate has been ongoing for a long time with regard to bank interest or commercial
interest and whether it is Riba or not. The majority of ancient philosophers and Greek and
Roman thinkers forbade interest in their day. The Old and the New Testaments similarly
prohibited it. 23 The logic as to why religions, including Islam, have prohibited interest is
that it exerts disastrous effects on human societies by reinforcing the tendency of wealth
accumulation in fewer hands. It leads to an ever-increasing share of risk-free capital vis-à-vis
risk-related capital, resulting in business failures, unemployment and ultimately to gross
22 Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, p. 425.
23 For details, see Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, Taqi Usmani’s part, paras 37, 38.


----- p.54 (pdf 82) -----


54 Understanding Islamic Finance
inequalities of income and wealth that are bound to end up in social strife and economic
chaos. Islam is opposed to exploitation in every form and stands for fair and equitable
dealings among all human beings. 24
Riba, the term used for any rate of return on the principal of loans/debts, has been
erroneously divided into two parts, i.e. the permitted cost of capital use and the prohibited
high rates. In English terminology, the Latin word “usury” was used as the equivalent of
Riba. It means the use of anything and in the case of loans it means the use of borrowed
capital; hence, usury means the price paid for the use of money. In medieval times, the word
“interest” was identified as something different from usury. The Encyclopedia Britannica
has dealt in detail with the split of Riba into two parts. Division was made by the King
(and the Church) of England in 1545 into a legal maximum that was termed interest and
another over and above the legal maximum. The confusion was confounded by the inception
of paper money/fiduciary money/token money.
The movement for the acceptability of “interest” on theoretical grounds was launched
effectively by Calvin and Molinaeus in the middle of the sixteenth century. With the
development of trade and commerce, opportunities for investment of money increased and
economists and experts started justifying interest, at least on loans for commercial and
productive purposes. The movement gathered momentum with the advent of the Industrial
Revolution in the eighteenth century and ultimately overshadowed all arguments and rationale
from those who tried to defend the Divine prohibition of interest and save mankind from its
disastrous effects. EH Net Encyclopedia has concluded the following in this regard:
“Most nations continue to regulate usury, which is now, in the West, defined as contracting to
charge interest on a loan without risk to the lender at an interest rate greater than that set by the law.
However, moral arguments are still being made about whether or not contracting for any interest
is permissible. Because both the Bible and the Qur’ ¯an can be read as forbidding usury, there will
always be moral, as well as social and economic reasons for arguing about the permissibility of
lending at interest. 25 ”
The views of J.L. Hanson, expressed in his Dictionary of Commerce and Economics , are
worth quoting here:
“Usury: A term now restricted to the charging of a very high rate of interest on a loan, but formerly
used in connection with interest whether the rate charged was high or low. The medieval church,
following the law of Moses and the writings of Aristotle and other Greek philosophers, condemned
the payment of interest on a loan as usury and unjust. The usury laws passed in the sixteenth
century prohibited a rate of interest in England in excess of 5 per cent.” (pp. 470–471)
The Rationale for the Prohibition of Interest
Different quarters have expressed different opinions with regard to the rationale or purpose
of prohibiting interest by the Shar ¯ı´ah. As a whole, socio-economic and distributive justice,
intergenerational equity, economic instability and ecological destruction are considered the
basis of the prohibition of interest. Keeping in mind all relevant texts and the principles of
Islamic law, the only reason that appears convincing is that of distributive justice, because
the prohibition of Riba is intended to prevent the accumulation of wealth in a few hands;
24 For the antisocial impact of the institution of interest see Somerville, 1931; Cannan et al., 1932; Dennis and Somerville, 1932.
25 http://eh.net/encyclopedia/article/jones.usury.


----- p.55 (pdf 83) -----


The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics 55
that is, it is not to be allowed to “circulate among the rich” (Holy Qur’ ¯an, 59: 7). Therefore,
the major purpose of Riba prohibition is to block the means that lead to the accumulation
of wealth in the hands of a few, whether they are banks or individuals.
To many people, the matter of Riba prohibition is simply a matter of ritual obedience.
Shar¯ı´ah text prohibits Riba, therefore it should be taken as prohibited; it is not necessary
to know the rationale. Some say that prohibition of Riba prevents a life of luxury, prohibits
hoarding and leads to broad-based development. Still others believe that it prevents injustice
and, therefore, injustice is the only cause of prohibition. On this basis they differentiate
between interest and usury and claim that modern commercial interest is not oppressive as
it was in the past. They hold this viewpoint for vagueness of the term (Zulm), as it provides
flexibility in expressing opinions freely. However, it is not right to stress only this reason.
The rationale for prohibition of charging interest from someone who is constrained to
borrow to meet his essential consumption requirements is obvious. But interest on loans
taken for productive purposes is also prohibited because it is not an equitable form of
transaction.26 When money is invested in a productive undertaking, the amount of profit that
may accrue is not known beforehand and there is also the possibility of a loss. Therefore,
the charging of a fixed and predetermined rate of interest on loans for productive purposes
cannot be morally justified. Justice demands that the provider of money capital should share
the risk with the entrepreneur if he wishes to earn a profit. Thus, there is a basic difference
between Islam and capitalism in regard to the treatment of money capital as a factor of
production. Whereas in the capitalistic system, money capital is treated on a par with labour
and land, each being entitled to a return irrespective of profit or loss, this is not so in Islam,
which treats money capital on a par with enterprise. 27
The institution of interest creates parasites in society and thereby the gap between the rich
and the poor keeps on widening. According to Allama Yusuf Ali (the eminent translator of
the Holy Qur’ ¯an into English): “Whereas legitimate trade or industry increases the prosperity
and stability of men and nations, dependence over usury would merely encourage a race
of idlers, cruel bloodsuckers and worthless fellows who do not know their own good and
therefore are akin to madmen”. The distinction between “usury” and “interest” in this context
is meaningless. Any rate, i.e. anything above zero, would lead to exploitation in the long
run, as can be witnessed in the case of developing countries where all economic problems
happen to be the direct result of an interest-based system – low levels of savings, heavy
budgetary deficits, inflation along with recession, high debt servicing and unemployment.
What is considered a reasonable rate today may be regarded as “usurious” tomorrow. And
what may be “usurious” today, may be treated as just “interest” tomorrow because of the
inflation rate prevailing in an economy. The distinction between interest and usury is made
just to deceive mankind and to allow the same old robbery in a more presentable form.
The general view of conventional economists has been that interest plays an important role
in promoting savings, investment and economic development. However, this is not the case
in a real sense and the reality on the ground indicates the reverse. The level of savings in an
economy is determined by a large number of factors – the rate of return on savings being
just one determinant. The income level in any economy, the pattern of income distribution,
the rate of inflation, stability in the economy and fiscal measures of the government are
much more important than the role of interest in savings and investment. Similarly, the
26 See Council of Islamic Ideology (CII), 1980, pp. 7, 8.
27 Ahmad, 1993.


----- p.56 (pdf 84) -----


56 Understanding Islamic Finance
conventional view that borrowing enhances productivity and capacity to repay is not true.
Many economists have been pointing out for a long time the harmful impact of the institution
of interest on national and global economies. 28
The interest-based financial system is creating unrepayable debt – making a class of
people richer and leaving others poorer and oppressed. Today, all developing countries are
caught up in a sophisticated debt trap owing to the most striking feature of the interest-based
mechanism: yesterday’s debt can be repaid by taking out more debt today. The unproductive
and wasteful spending both by individuals and governments, which the interest-based and
easily available credit system has the tendency to promote, has led to a decline in savings,
real investment and employment opportunities in almost all countries around the world. The
system, combined with inflation, becomes a recipe for total economic instability. This affects
the poor and the middle class, which comprise the major part of the population, and thereby
the level of national savings.
It has been proved by empirical evidence that credit, compared with equity, does not
play any critical role in modern investment and business spending. Contrary to the popular
misconception, a major part of funds which finance business needs in the US, for example,
are raised as equity (and not loans) on the open market, i.e. common stocks. Kester (1986)
lists debt-to-equity ratios for major categories of business in the US and Japan, and shows
that most of these ratios are substantially below unity, so that equity financing is much more
prevalent than debt financing. This amount of debt would be reduced even further were it
not for the artificial tax advantage of debt-based financing in these countries (since interest
payments can be written off). Mohsin S. Khan (1986) has shown that interest-based credit
increases the risk of banking crises. If collateral is sufficient, modern banks will finance
projects even with poor feasibility. This results in business failures.
It is a proven fact and also a ground reality that, at the global level, debt has been used by
capitalist countries and the multilateral institutions as a tool of control. The Ottoman Empire
was subjected to European influence through the institution of interest-based debt. 29 The role
of the IMF and the World Bank is also to subjugate the indebted countries to the will of the
rich countries. The Economist, against the backdrop of America’s war against terrorism after
September 11, 2001, puts the caption: “The IMF and the World Bank: Bribing Allies” and
contends that the two institutions that are driven by political considerations have become a
part of America’s arsenal.
James Robertson has succinctly explained how the interest-based system works to favour
the rich and what role the present money system plays in the following words:
“The pervasive role of interest in the economic system results in the systematic transfer of money
from those who have less to those who have more. Again, this transfer of resources from poor to
rich has been made shockingly clear by the Third World debt crisis; but is applied universally. It is
partly because those who have more money to lend get more in interest than those who have less;
those who have less often have to borrow more; and partly because the cost of interest repayments
now forms a substantial element in the cost of all goods and services /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiWhen we look at the
money system that way and when we begin to think about how it should be redesigned to carry out
its functions fairly and efficiently as part of an enabling and conserving economy, the arguments for
an interest-free inflation-free money system for the twenty-first century seem to be very strong.” 30
28 For details see Siddiqi, 1981, pp. 47–51, Ahmed, 1967, pp. 171–196.
29 Zaman and Zaman, 2001, p. 71 (quoting from Blaisdell, 1929).
30 Robertson, 1990, pp. 130, 131. For further details, see Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, Taqi Usmani’s part of judgement, paras
132–179.


----- p.57 (pdf 85) -----


The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics 57
An interest-based system generates unemployment because capital and wealth flow in the
direction of high and risk-free return without regard to the efficiency of the fund-borrowing
sectors. Thus, it has a built-in tendency to increase risk-free capital vis-à-vis risk-based
capital. Why would a person invest his own resources to establish a factory, wherein he will
have to deal with unionized labour and many other problems, when he can earn a high return
by investing money in any risk-free financial paper issued by the government to meet its
revenue expenditures? This results in recession, unemployment, bankruptcies and stagflation.
Wayne A.M. Visser and Alastair McIntosh of the Centre for Human Ecology have
described the extensive history of the critique of usury and come to the conclusion that the
present global economic system is more usurious/interest-based than ever before. In their
opinion, the reasons cited in the critique of usury seem more pressing and relevant now
than ever:
“In particular, it is the belief of the authors that individuals or organisations in the West with
money to invest, especially those which like to consider themselves as being ethical, might have
rather more to learn from Islam than is generally acknowledged. But first, society needs to be
re-conscientised to the relevance of the age-old usury debate in modern times.” 31
Riba and other Factor Payments
The guaranteed reward on capital in the form of interest marks a fundamental difference
between the manner in which the Islamic and conventional economic systems view and use
money. Capital as a factor of production in Islamic finance constitutes those things which
can be used in the production process only if they are wholly consumed, such as gold or
silver in the past and/or money in the present age. In other words, they cannot be lent
or leased. Therefore, one cannot derive any benefit from money unless one gives it up in
exchange for commodities or services using the structure of any of the valid contracts of
sale or lease.
Capital in the above perspective is entitled to profit provided it also takes liability of
the risk of loss. Fixed assets like buildings and machinery have claims on rent. Labour
includes all sorts of human effort, rendered both physically and mentally, and is entitled
to wages/salaries. The entrepreneur gets his reward for his physical as well as his mental
exertion and not in exchange for the liability of the risk of loss of capital. Islam views the
risk of loss as being attributable to capital that is money itself.
Hence, there is no place for “interest”. That is to say, a person who wants to invest his
money in any business must take the risk of loss, only then is he entitled to profit. The one
who provides land gets rent or revenue, and the provider of labour gets a salary or wages.
Should any joint business fail, the provider of capital would lose his money, the provider of
land would lose rent and the provider of labour would lose salary. If a man owns his business,
he gets or loses all three rewards. Details about this aspect have been given in Chapter 2.
3.2.2 Prohibition of Gharar
The second major prohibition is that of Gharar, which refers to the uncertainty or hazard
caused by lack of clarity regarding the subject matter or the price in a contract or exchange.
A sale or any other business contract which entails an element of Gharar is prohibited.
31 Visser and McIntosh, 1998, pp. 175–189. Also: http://www.alastairmcintosh.com/articles/1998_usury.htm#_ednref3.


----- p.58 (pdf 86) -----


58 Understanding Islamic Finance
“Gharar” means hazard, chance, stake or risk (Khatar). Khatar/Gharar is found if the liability
of any of the parties to a contract is uncertain or contingent; delivery of one of the exchange
items is not in the control of any party or the payment from one side is uncertain. In the
legal terminology of jurists, “Gharar” is the sale of a thing which is not present at hand or
the sale of a thing whose “Aqibah” (consequence) is not known or a sale involving hazard in
which one does not know whether it will come to be or not, e.g. the sale of a fish in water,
or a bird in the air. Material available about Gharar in the literature on Islamic economics
and finance is far less than that on Riba. However, the jurists have tried to discuss different
aspects to determine whether or not any transaction would be non-Shar ¯ı´ah compliant due
to the involvement of Gharar.
Uncertainty cannot be avoided altogether in any business. Risk-taking is rather a condition
for the entitlement to profit in business. The problem, however, was that the extent of
uncertainty making any transaction Haram had not been clearly defined. Lately, scholars have
differentiated between Gharar-e-Kathir and Gharar Qalil (too much and nominal uncertainty)
and declared that only those transactions that involve too much or excessive uncertainty in
respect of the subject matter and the price in a contract should be prohibited. Therefore,
although it has been more difficult to define than “Riba”, a consensus has emerged in
the recent past regarding its extent rendering any transaction valid or void. Accordingly,
Gharar is considered to be of less significance than Riba. While the slightest involvement
of Riba makes a transaction non-Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant, some degree of Gharar in the sense of
uncertainty is acceptable in the Islamic structure of business and finance.
However, many areas still need Ijtihad, particularly in terms of Takaful operations, the
secondary market for Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant securities and the possible involvement of various
derivatives in Islamic finance.
Imam Malik defines Gharar as the sale of an object which is not present and thus whose
quality of being good or bad is not known to the buyer: as in the sale of a runaway slave
or an animal which has been lost by its owner, or the sale of an offspring still in the womb
of its mother, 32 or buying of olives with olive oil, or sesame with sesame oil or butter with
butter oil. These are all illegal sales according to Imam Malik because of the involvement
of the element of chance.
As indicated above, Gharar includes ambiguity/uncertainty about the end result of a
contract and the nature and/or quality and specifications of the subject matter of the contract
or the rights and obligations of the parties, possession and/or delivery of the item of exchange.
In other words, it relates to uncertainty in the basic elements of any agreement: subject
matter, consideration and liabilities. The sale of a thing over which the seller has no control,
like an escaped animal or any bird flying in the air, or a contract in which the price has
not been finalized or the future performance date is not known involves Gharar, making the
transaction illegal. In some other cases, however, jurists differ slightly about the coverage
of Gharar. 33
A number of Companions of the holy Prophet (pbuh) have reported the prohibition of
Bai‘ al Gharar from the holy Prophet. While a number of books of Hadith and Islamic
jurisprudence mention this special form of prohibited Bai‘, the term Gharar is generally used
as a cardinal principle of Islamic law on Bai‘. For example, Imam Bukhari in his Sahih,
32 Malik, 1985, p. 422. See also Tirmidhi, 1988, No. 1252. It is important to observe that while an offspring of a cow in its womb
cannot be sold, the price of the cow is indirectly increased due to its conception and that is valid according to the jurists.
33 Al-Dhareer, 1997, pp. 9–11; Hassan, 1993, pp. 47, 48.


----- p.59 (pdf 87) -----


The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics 59
has not reported the Hadith on Bai‘ al Gharar but captioned a chapter “Al Gharar Sale and
Habal-al-Hablah” (i.e. sale of what is in the womb of the animal). Under this heading, he
reports the Hadith forbidding the Habal-al-Hablah and trading by “Mulamasah” (sale by
touching) and “Munabadhah” (e.g. bartering items without inspection). Al ’Ayny, in his
Sharah on Bukhari, has explained why the reference to Gharar is contained only in the
heading of a chapter, which does not include a Hadith on Gharar as such. He says that the
Hadith forbids the Habal-al-Hablah sale, which is a form of Gharar. Thus, Imam Bukhari
refers to the multiple forms of Gharar, of which he has singled out “Habal-al-Hablah”, a
device by which a particular item refers to all items of similar description. 34 From this, the
jurists derive the general legal principle that a contract must not be doubtful and uncertain
as far as the rights and obligations of the parties are concerned, otherwise it would be
tantamount to deceiving any of the parties. The object of the contract must be precisely
determined, price and terms must be clear and known (Ma‘lum). This is generally true of all
objects which can be measured, counted or weighed and which are subject to the prohibition
of Riba.
According to Shar ¯ı´ah scholars, to become prohibited, a hazard or uncertainty would be
major and remunerative, e.g. when involved in sale contracts it should affect the principal
aspects of the contract, and it may not be the need of any valid contract like that of Salam
and Istisna‘a. Gharar can be avoided if some standards of certainty are met, such as in the
case of Salam, where a number of conditions are required to be fulfilled. The vendor must
be able to deliver the commodity to the purchaser. Therefore, Salam cannot be conducted
in respect of those goods that are normally not available in the market at the stipulated time
of delivery. It is prohibited to sell any undeliverable goods. The commodity must be clearly
known and its quantity must be determined to the contracting parties.
As indicated above, Gharar relates more to “uncertainty” than to risk as used in commercial
terminology. This uncertainty relates to the existence of the subject matter, rights of or
benefits to the parties and the consequences of the contract. Some jurists apply it to cases
of doubtfulness, e.g. whether or not something will take place. This excludes “unknown”
objects.35 On the other hand, the Zahiri school of thought applies it only to the unknown
to the exclusion of the “doubtful”. Thus, according to Ibn Hazm, Gharar in sales occurs
when the purchaser does not know what he has bought and the seller does not know what
he has sold. 36 However, the majority of jurists include both the unknown and the doubtful
to render a transaction Gharar-based and thus prohibited. In particular, the Malikites widen
the scope of Gharar on the basis of which eminent contemporary scholar Shaikh Al-Dhareer
has classified the principles covering Gharar under the following headings: 37
I. Gharar in the terms and essence of the contract includes:
(a) Two sales in one.
(b) Downpayment (‘Arb ¯un) sale.
(c) “pebble”, “touch” and “toss” sales. 38
34 Al-Ayny, n.d.
35 Al-Dhareer, 1997, p. 10; cf Ibn Abideen, n.d., iv/147.
36 Ibn Hazn, 1988, 8, pp. 343, 389, 439.
37 Al-Dhareer, 1997, pp. 10, 11.
38 Referring to selling the lot of cloth upon which the stone thrown will fall ( Bai‘ al Hasat) or clothes with unspecified quality of
cloth, size and design.


----- p.60 (pdf 88) -----


60 Understanding Islamic Finance
(d) Suspended (Mu‘allaq) sale.
(e) Future sale.
II Gharar in the object of the contract includes:
(a) Ignorance about the genus.
(b) Ignorance about the species.
(c) Ignorance about attributes.
(d) Ignorance about the quantity of the object.
(e) Ignorance about the specific identity of the object.
(f) Ignorance about the time of payment in deferred sales.
(g) Explicit or probable inability to deliver the object.
(h) Contracting on a nonexistent object.
(i) Not seeing the object.
In order to avoid uncertainty, Islamic law denies the power to sell in the following three
situations:
1. Things which, as the object of a legal transaction, do not exist.
2. Things which exist but which are not in possession of the seller or the availability of
which may not be expected.
3. Things which are exchanged on the basis of uncertain delivery and payment.
Such transactions are prohibited to avoid fraudulent activities, disputes and injustice in trade,
as a sale involving Gharar may cause a vendor to consume or erode the property of others
unlawfully. Abdullah ibn Abbas (Gbpwh) extended the prohibition of Bai‘ al Gharar to Bai‘
al-Gh¯aib (the sale of absent or concealed goods). The latter contract is considered as falling
within the notion of Gharar, since the object of sale is uncertain and the purchaser has the
right of option (Khiy ¯ar) to revoke the contract upon sight.
Examples of Gharar are: ignorance about the species being sold, about the quantity
of the object and the price, lack of specification of the item being sold, e.g. saying: “I
sell you one of the houses of this project” without specifying that house, sale of debt
(assignment without recourse to the seller) is prohibited as realization of the debt in the
future is not certain, ignorance of the time of payment in deferred sales, contracting
on a nonexistent object and/or the inability to deliver the object, indicating more than
one price or option in a contract unless one is specifically chosen. As this uncertainty
may lead to undue benefit to one party at the cost of the other, Gharar sometimes also
implies deceit.
Gharar also means deception through ignorance by one or more parties to a contract. The
following are some more examples of Gharar:
1. Selling goods that the seller is unable to deliver, as this involves counterparty or settlement
risk. This is why, for goods to be covered under the subject of Salam (which is permitted),
it is necessary that the relevant commodity might be available in the market at least at
the time when delivery has been stipulated.
2. Making a contract conditional on an unknown event, such as “ /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiwhen it rains”.
3. Two sales in one transaction in such a way that two different prices are given for one
article, one for cash and one for credit, without specifying at which price one buys the
item with the understanding that the sale is binding on the buyer at either price; or selling


----- p.61 (pdf 89) -----


The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics 61
two different articles at one price, one for immediate remittance and the other for a
deferred one while the sales are conditional upon one another.
4. Making the contracts too complex to clearly define the benefits/liabilities of the parties.
That is why the holy Prophet (pbuh) has prohibited combining two sales in one. Shaikh
Siddiq Al-Darir opines in this regard: “ /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmithe two sales are concluded jointly as when
the seller says: ‘I sell you my house at such a price if you sell me your car at such a
price’. Such a sale is forbidden because of Gharar in the contract: the person who sells
the item at a hundred in cash and at a hundred and ten a year hence does not know which
of the two sales will take place and he who sells his house provided the other would sell
him his car does not know whether this contract will be accomplished or not, since the
fulfilment of the first sale is conditional upon the fulfilment of the second. Gharar exists
in both cases: in the first case, the sale price is not specified; in the second, the sale may
or may not take place.”
5. Selling goods on the basis of false description.
6. All contracts where value-relevant information is not clearly available to the parties.
A number of invalid sales are included in this category. It may include:
— Selling known or unknown goods against an unknown price, such as the sale of milk
in the udder of a cow; selling the contents of a sealed box; or someone may say:
“I sell you whatever is in my pocket”.
— Selling goods without proper description, such as selling the lot of cloth upon which
the stone thrown will fall (Bai‘ al Hasat) or clothes with unspecified quality of cloth,
size and design.
— Selling goods without specifying the price, such as selling at the “market price”.
— Selling goods without allowing the buyer to properly examine the goods. 39
Jahl (ignorance or nonclarity about the parties or their rights and obligations, the goods
or the price) is also a part of Gharar. The absence of Jahl requires that the commodity must
be defined and its specifications clearly indicated. The purchaser should know about the
existence and condition of the goods and the vendor should be able to deliver them on the
agreed terms and at the agreed time. In other words, one should not undertake anything or
any act blindly without sufficient knowledge, or risk oneself in adventure without knowing
the outcome or the consequences.
The general principles for avoiding Gharar in sales transactions that can be concluded
from the above discussion are: the contracts must be free from excessive uncertainty about
the subject matter and its counter value in exchanges; the commodity must be defined,
determined and deliverable and clearly known to the contracting parties; quality and quantity
must be stipulated; a contract must not be doubtful or uncertain so far as the rights and
obligations of the contracting parties are concerned; there should be no Jahl or uncertainty
about availability, existence and deliverability of goods and the parties should know the
actual state of the goods.
3.2.3 Prohibition of Maisir/Qim ¯ar (Games of Chance)
The words Maisir and Qim ¯ar are used in the Arabic language identically. Maisir refers to
easily available wealth or acquisition of wealth by chance, whether or not it deprives the
39 For all these traditions, see Muslim, 1981 book of sales.


----- p.62 (pdf 90) -----


62 Understanding Islamic Finance
other’s right. Qim ¯ar means the game of chance – one gains at the cost of other(s); a person
puts his money or a part of his wealth at stake wherein the amount of money at risk might
bring huge sums of money or might be lost or damaged. While the word used in the Holy
Qur’¯an for prohibition of gambling and wagering is “Maisir” (verses 2: 219 and 5: 90, 91),
the Hadith literature discusses this act generally in the name of “Qim ¯ar”.
According to the jurists, the difference between Maisir and Qim ¯ar is that the latter is
an important kind of the former. “Maisir”, derived from “Yusr”, means wishing something
valuable with ease and without paying an equivalent compensation (‘Iwad) for it or without
working for it, or without undertaking any liability against it, by way of a game of chance.
“Qim¯ar” also means receipt of money, benefit or usufruct at the cost of others, having
entitlement to that money or benefit by resorting to chance. Both words are applicable to
games of chance. References from the Holy Qur’ ¯an in this regard are:
• “O you who believe! intoxicants and gambling, sacrificing to stones, and divination by
arrows, are abominable actions of Satan; so abstain from them, that you may prosper.”
(5: 90)
• “Satan intends to excite enmity and hatred among you with intoxicants and gambling, and
hinder you from the remembrance of Allah, and from prayer; will ye not then abstain?”
(5: 91)
• “They ask thee concerning wine and gambling. Say: ‘In them is great sin and some
benefits for people; but the sin is greater than the benefits’.” (4: 219)
Gambling is a form of Gharar because the gambler is ignorant of the result of the gamble.
A person puts his money at stake wherein the amount being risked might bring huge sums
of money or might be lost or damaged. Present-day lotteries are also a kind of gambling.
According to Pakistan’s Federal Shariat Court (FSC), a lottery in which coupons or tabs are
given and inducement or incentives are provided by an uncertain and unknown event depending
on chance, or disproportionate prizes are distributed by the drawing of lots and where a partici-
pating person intends to avail themselves of a chance at prizes is repugnant to the tenets of the
Shar¯ı´ah. The FSC adds that a scheme wherein the investors’ money is safe and intact, but the
prizes to be given are related to interest generated from capital accumulated through it, is also
repugnant to the tenets of the Shar¯ı´ah due to the involvement of Qim¯ar.
Maisir and Qim ¯ar are involved in a number of conventional financial transactions and
bank schemes/products which Islamic banks have to avoid. Conventional insurance is not
Shar¯ı´ah-compliant due to the involvement of both Riba and Maisir. Governments and
public/private sector corporations mobilize resources on the basis of lottery and draws,
which come under the banner of gambling and are, therefore, prohibited. Present futures and
options contracts that are settled through price differences only are covered under gambling.
In Webster’s dictionary, a lottery has been defined as “a distribution of prizes by lots or
chance”. In practice, a number of forms of lottery are prevalent, some of which might be
valid, but the majority are invalid from the Shar ¯ı´ah point of view. It is necessary to have
a test to decide which are permitted and which are not. An analysis of the Qur’ ¯anic verses
and the holy Prophet’s traditions would show that in valid lotteries, no one should have any
personal right or vested interest in the matter and no one should be deprived of what he had
already had or contributed to the process. Further, if the exigency of a situation dictates that
some out of them have to forego any right or fulfil any liability, the solution in the absence


----- p.63 (pdf 91) -----


The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics 63
of any other valid or agreed formula is not to decide arbitrarily but through drawing of lots,
as in the case of the holy Prophet Younus (pbuh). 40
Again, wherever a donor, grantor or a man in authority has to select some people who
have equal footing in order to confer some right, privilege or concession on them, the matter
could be decided by drawing of lots. Such a form of lottery in such cases is permissible.
Sometimes, entrepreneurs offer products whereby, when sold for a price, any additional
product is given to the purchaser as an incentive, without any scheme of drawing of prizes
or lots. This is also permissible as the purchaser knows what he is purchasing and the vendor
knows what he is offering for sale and what its price is. The price being known and the
property being sold are available for inspection and there is no element of chance. Such a
sale, though induced and publicized with a reward to attract customers, is not hit by any
provision or tenets of the Shar ¯ı´ah.
However, wherever it is a question of causing loss to some in the drawing of lots with the
result that others benefit at the cost of those who lose, it will be the prohibited type. A lottery
in which the incentive provided to the investors is disproportionate prizes distributed by
drawing of lots, or where a participating person intends to avail themselves of a chance at
prizes, is repugnant to the injunctions of Islam. 41
In some other schemes, tickets, coupons or tabs are given on the purchase of the product,
leading further to the drawing of lots. In such cases the inducement is by an uncertain and
unknown event, depending on chance, and such a promotion of sale is clearly hit by the
injunction of Islam, generally prohibiting gambling, wagering and swearing. Exaggerated
publicity and misstatements tend to deceive the clients by giving the impression that everyone
will become a millionaire, while the probability of the “bumper prize” is one or two in
hundreds of thousands and for even the lowest prizes is one in many thousands of wagers.
Another aspect worth discussion is that such schemes involve Riba, Gharar and Jahl in
addition to Qim ¯ar or gambling. The proceeds of such schemes take the form of debt and the
prize paid is a part of the predetermined additional payment made by the banks (borrower)
to the lender. While the winners of prizes take the interest money through lottery, the non-
winners wait for their chance. According to the Shar ¯ı´ah principles, if the intention of a
purchaser of an exhibition ticket is basically to win the prize, the buyer of the ticket will be
a sinner. Therefore, not only the money pooled for prizes is illegal, but the method of its
distribution through the lottery system also resembles gambling.
Most of the lotteries operated by governments, financial institutions and NGOs are repug-
nant to the tenets of the Shar ¯ı´ah because the incentives provided to the investors are not the
profits accruing on the investment but disproportionate prizes distributed by drawing of lots.
Besides, the attraction is not to give a helping hand to charitable and philanthropic purposes
but to avail oneself of a chance at prizes, thereby disobeying the commandment of the Holy
Qur’¯an on the subject.
More relevant to a discussion on financial institutions are lotteries or prize-carrying
schemes/bonds that banks launch from time to time. Can Islamic banks launch any such
bonds or schemes? We discuss this aspect below.
In prize bond schemes, although investors’ money may remain safe, the prizes are related
to the interest generated from the capital so accumulated. Precalculated interest is distributed
among the bondholders. There is also the aspect of the chance for a few to get a prize without
40 See details of this incident in any Tafsir of the Holy Qur’ ¯an in verse 10: 97.
41 For details, see Ayub, 1999, pp. 34–42; cf. Pakistan, PLD, 1992, SC pp. 157–159.


----- p.64 (pdf 92) -----


64 Understanding Islamic Finance
undertaking any liability or doing work for it, at the cost of other bondholders. Therefore,
conventional prize-carrying schemes are repugnant to the tenets of the Shar ¯ı´ah due to the
involvement of both Riba and Maisir.
Banks running such schemes normally do not give any return to the participants of the
scheme. Some others give a very meagre return to general participants of the scheme and
give the difference between the meagre rate given to the majority of the participants and
huge prizes to a few out of hundreds of thousands of participants. This causes loss to the
majority to give undue advantage to some of the participants of the schemes. Moreover, the
attraction in these schemes is to avail oneself of a chance at a prize and become a millionaire
overnight. It is not only un-Islamic but also against the common norms of morality and
sound economic principles. Such schemes divert the flow of scarce resources from real
sector economic activities to games of chance and speculation.
3.3 BUSINESS ETHICS AND NORMS
In addition to the major prohibitions, including Riba, Gharar and gambling, the Islamic
Shar¯ı´ah has enunciated a set of principles that provide a basic framework for the conduct
of economic activities in general, and financial and commercial transactions in particular.
The Holy Qur’ ¯an and the Sunnah refer to a number of norms and principles which govern
the rights and obligations of parties to the contracts. Principles enunciating justice, mutual
help, free consent and honesty on the part of the parties to a contract, avoiding fraud,
misrepresentation and misstatement of facts and negation of injustice or exploitation provide
grounds for valid contracts. 42
These norms are related to the accountability of human beings before Allah (SWT) and
therefore have different implications from those of the norms of mainstream business ethics.
Islam teaches belief in the Hereafter, which requires that man should not usurp anyone’s
rights. It is a principle of Shar ¯ı´ah that while Allah (SWT) may pardon the faults committed
against His rights (neglect of worship, for example), he does not pardon the harm done by
a man to fellow beings or even to other creatures. So, giving people their due right is the
cardinal principle of the Islamic system of ethics. Some encouragements like benevolence,
purification of income, proper transparency and disclosures, documentation of transactions
leading to precision about the rights and liabilities of the parties and comprehensive ethics
requiring care for others are also part of the Islamic framework of business norms. Below,
we briefly give some important norms.
3.3.1 Justice and Fair Dealing
The foremost principle governing all economic activities is justice, which means fair dealing
with all and keeping a balance. Justice keeps the sky and the earth in their right places
and is the cementing force between various segments in a society. The Holy Qur’ ¯an says:
“/periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiAnd let not the enmity and hatred of others make you avoid justice. Be just; that is
nearest to piety /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmi” (5: 8). Stressing this point, the Qur’ ¯an further says: “You who believe
stand steadfast before Allah as witness for (truth and) fair play” (4: 135). This makes the
point clear that whoever believes in God has to be just with everyone – even with enemies.
42 For details, see Hasanuz Zaman, 2003.


----- p.65 (pdf 93) -----


The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics 65
In another place, the Qur’ ¯an says: “And eat up not one another’s property unjustly (in any
illegal way, e.g. stealing, robbing, deceiving, etc.) nor give bribery to the rulers that you
may knowingly eat up a part of the property of others sinfully” (2: 188).
Islam thus requires that the rights and obligations of any person are neither greater nor
lesser in any way than the rights and obligations of other people. Business rules are equally
applicable to all. No one can take the property of others wrongfully. In his celebrated speech
at the time of the last pilgrimage, the holy Prophet (pbuh) declared the inviolability of the
rights of human beings in all the three categories of person, property and honour.
In the early Islamic era and subsequently up to the Middle Ages, a lot of emphasis was
given to the character building of the masses to ensure justice, fair play with one another
and the resultant harmony in society. Many remarkable events of justice and equity are
recorded in Islamic history. It was through this deep sense of true justice and equality that
Islam played a remarkable role in the development of human society. A number of norms
and good practices stem from the overall principles of fair play and justice. These are briefly
discussed below.
Honesty and Gentleness
Honesty, truthfulness and care for others are the basic lessons taught to Muslims by the
Shar¯ı´ah, with relatively more emphasis in respect of business transactions. The holy Prophet
(pbuh) has said: “The truthful and honest merchant shall be with the Prophets, the truthful
and the martyrs on the day of Resurrection.” He also said: “It is not lawful for a Muslim
to sell to his brother something defective without pointing out the defect”. Cheating others
and telling lies is considered a great sin. Allah’s Apostle used to invoke Allah in the prayer
saying: “O Allah, I seek refuge with you from all sins, and from being in debt.” Someone
said: “O Allah’s Apostle! You very often seek refuge with Allah from being in debt”. He
replied: “If a person is in debt, he tells lies when he speaks, and breaks his promise when
he promises.”43 This does not mean that taking a loan is prohibited; the holy Prophet (pbuh)
borrowed for himself and also for the Islamic State, as is discussed in Chapter 7. The
emphasis is on honesty and speaking the truth and avoiding the sinful act of telling lies; so
loans should be taken out only in the case of severe personal or genuine business need.
Ibn Umar (Gbpwh) narrates: “A man came to the Prophet (pbuh) and said: ‘I am often
betrayed in bargaining.’ The Prophet advised him: ‘When you buy something, say (to the
seller): “No deception”.’ The man used to say so afterwards”. In the case of deception
one is entitled to rescind the contract. Similarly, Ghaban, which means misappropriation or
defrauding others in respect of specifications of the goods and their prices, is prohibited with
the purpose of ensuring that the seller gives the commodity as per its known and apparent
characteristics and charges the fair price. The Holy Qur’ ¯an says: “Fill the measure when you
measure, and weigh with a perfectly right balance.” (17: 35; also verses 86: 1–6).
Another feature of a good businessman is that he avoids harshness and is gentle with other
parties and stakeholders. As reported by Imam Bukhari, Allah’s Apostle said: “May Allah
have mercy on a person who is gentle when he sells, when he buys and when he demands
his rights.” The person who is liable to pay or undertake any liability is duty bound not to
react even if the person who has some right to receive becomes aggressive in demanding
43 Reported by Tirmizi, Darmi, Ibn Majah and others.


----- p.66 (pdf 94) -----


66 Understanding Islamic Finance
his right. Creditors have also been encouraged to be gentle and even give more time if the
debtor is really in trouble.
The holy Prophet once said: “Whoever takes the money of the people with the intention
of repaying it, Allah would (arrange to) repay it on his behalf, and whoever takes it in order
to spoil it, then Allah would spoil him.” A man demanded his debts (in the form of a camel)
from the holy Prophet in such a rude manner that his Companions intended to harm him,
but the Prophet said: “Leave him, no doubt, for he (the creditor) has the right to demand
it (harshly). Buy a camel and give it to him.” They said: “The camel that is available is
older/better than the camel he demands.” The Prophet said: “Buy it and give it to him, for
the best among you are those who repay their debts handsomely.”
It is important to observe, however, that the nature of treatment in the institutional set-up
of business is different from any individual-to-individual business relationship. If someone
waives the debt payable by any destitute or a person with a genuine problem, he is doing
a noble job, as per the instructions of the Holy Qur’ ¯an. But institutions like banks, which
manage public money as a trust, cannot and should not give a free hand to those who wilfully
default in fulfilling their obligations. That is why all Islamic banks have been allowed by
their Shar ¯ı´ah boards to impose fines on defaulters with the objective of disciplining their
clients and as a deterrent against wilful default. Abu Huraira narrates: “Allah’s Apostle said,
‘Procrastination (delay) in repaying debts by a wealthy person is injustice’.” The amount of
fine or penalty is used for charitable purposes and is not credited to th eP&L Account of
the banks. This aspect is discussed in more detail in Chapter 7.
Prohibition of Najash
Bidding up the price without an intention to take delivery of the commodity is termed
“Najash” and is not permissible. The Prophet (pbuh) has said: “A N ¯ajish (one who serves
as an agent to bid up the price in an auction) is a cursed taker of Riba.” 44 As reported by
Hakim in his Sahih, the Prophet said: “If anyone interferes in the market to create a rise in
prices, God has right to cast him face down in Hell.” This practice is not only unethical, but
also harmful for society, as it creates distortions in the market.
Prohibition of Khalabah (Misleading Marketing)
Khalabah means misleading, like pursuing unaware and simple clients by overprojecting the
quality of a commodity. It is prohibited due to being unethical: one presents his product in
such a way that factually it is not so. Accordingly, manipulation and excessive marketing
not based on facts about the wares are prohibited. As reported by Imam Muslim in his Sahih,
the holy Prophet said: “Refrain from swearing much while selling or doing business, for
it may increase business (in the beginning) but brings destruction (ultimately).” Misleading
advertising is covered under this prohibition.
Disclosure, Transparency and Facilitating Inspection
The Shar ¯ı´ah attaches great importance to the role of information in the market. One must
give ample opportunity to the client to see and check the commodity that he is going to buy.
44 Ibn Hajar, 1981 (Bab al Najash).


----- p.67 (pdf 95) -----


The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics 67
Inaccurate or deceptive information is forbidden and considered a sin. The holy Prophet said:
“Deceiving a Mustarsal (an unknowing entrant into the market) is Riba”. 45 The concealment
of any information vital for the contract is tantamount to a violation of the Islamic norms of
business and the informationally disadvantaged party in a contract has the right to rescind
the contract.
A number of traditions of the holy Prophet (pbuh) stress the need for proper information
and disclosure and prohibit such practices that may hinder information about the value and
quality of the commodities to the buyers and the sellers. Keeping silent and not letting the
buyer know of any defect that is in the knowledge of the seller is considered dishonesty.
The holy Prophet (pbuh) once passed by a man who was selling grain. He asked him: “How
are you selling it?” The man then informed him. The Prophet (pbuh) then put his hand in
the heap of grain and found it wet inside. Then he said: “He who deceives other people is
not one of us.”
At the time of the holy Prophet (pbuh), when market information was not available to the
people of far-flung tribes who used to bring their produce for sale to the towns, the holy
Prophet said: “Do not go in advance to meet Rukb ¯an (grain dealers coming to the town
to sell goods) to buy their goods, nor should one of you sell over the head of another nor
increase the price to excite another to buy Najash” (Sahih Bukhari). This tenet of the holy
Prophet means that the grain dealers should come to the town’s market and sell their wares
at a price determined by the forces of demand and supply. All parties in the market must
have enough information about the quality, value of the product, purchasing power of the
clients and demand for the product. The wares being sold should be capable of inspection
to enable both parties to reasonably know the benefits in case the contract is finalized. For
the purpose of transparency, therefore, transactions should be executed within the market or
the place where people are aware of the demand and supply situation and are in a position
to trade taking into account all relevant information.
Holding any value-related information or structuring a contract in such a way that parties
to the contract are not aware of the specifications of the subject matter or its counter value
amounts to Gharar and Jahl, which are prohibited as discussed earlier. Hence, the Islamic
ethical system requires that all information relevant to valuation of the assets should be
equally accessible to all investors in the market. It is consistent with the parties’ right to
have necessary information and freedom from misrepresentation.
3.3.2 Fulfilling the Covenants and Paying Liabilities
Out of twelve commandments given to Muslims by the Holy Qur’ ¯an in Surah Bani Israel, a
few relate to fulfilling covenants and not usurping the wealth of the weak in society. “And
keep the covenant. Lo! Of the covenant it will be asked” (17: 34).
Business and financial contracts result in rights and liabilities of the parties and the liable
party must fulfil the liability as per the agreement or the contract. Shar ¯ı´ah emphasizes ful-
filment not only of contracts but also promises or unilateral agreements. One of the symbols
of hypocrites indicated by the Shar ¯ı´ah is that they do not fulfil their promises. We shall
discuss this aspect in detail in Chapter 5. It is pertinent to indicate briefly that contemporary
scholars unanimously consider promises binding. In Islamic finance, the concept of promise
is invoked in Murabaha to Purchase Orderer, leasing, Diminishing Musharakah, etc. In all
45 Suyuti, al-Jami‘ al-Saghir, under the word ghabn; Kanz al-‘Ummal, Kitab al-Buyu‘, 2, p. 205.


----- p.68 (pdf 96) -----


68 Understanding Islamic Finance
these arrangements, if the promisor does not fulfil the promise, the promisee has the right
to recover the actual loss incurred by him due to the breach of promise.
3.3.3 Mutual Cooperation and Removal of Hardship
Mutual help, solidarity and joint indemnification of losses and harm are other important
norms of the Islamic economic framework compared to the conventional economic structure,
where cut-throat competition causes a number of unethical practices like fraud and forgery.
Islam cherishes that a person helps others in times of need and prohibits any such action
that may cause any loss or harm to others. The Holy Qur’ ¯an says: “Assist one another in
the doing of good and righteousness. Assist not one another in sin and transgression, and
keep your duty to Allah” (5: 2). The holy Prophet has encouraged mutual assistance by
saying: “The Believers, in their affection, mercy and sympathy towards each other are like
one human body – if one of its organs suffers and complains, the entire body responds with
insomnia and fever” (Sahih Muslim).
Accordingly, a number of practices or schemes of mutual help like ‘ ¯Aqilah, Dham ¯an
Khatr al-Tariq, etc. that were prevalent in the pre-Islam period were validated by Islam.
‘ ¯Aqilah (kin or persons of relationship) was a custom in some tribes at the time of the holy
Prophet (pbuh) that worked on the principle of shared responsibility and mutual help. In case
of natural calamity, everybody used to contribute something until the disaster was relieved.
Similarly, this principle was used in respect of a blood money payment, which was made
by the whole tribe. In this way, the burden and the losses were distributed. Under Dham ¯an
Khatr al-Tariq, losses suffered by traders during journeys due to hazards on trade routes
were indemnified from jointly created funds. Islam accepted this principle of reciprocal
compensation and joint responsibility. This principle is the foundation of the institution of
“Takaful” – an alternative to conventional insurance in Islamic finance.
3.3.4 Free Marketing and Fair Pricing
Islam provides a basic freedom to enter into any type of Halal business or transaction.
However, this does not imply unbridled freedom to contract. Exchange is permitted only
when undertaken in permissible commodities and according to the rules and principles laid
down by the Shar¯ı´ah in respect of various types of transactions like Bai‘, Ijarah and services.
Jurists have discussed these rules in detail and we shall also elaborate upon them in the
relevant places in this book.
Islam envisages a free market where fair prices are determined by the forces of demand
and supply. Prices will be considered fair only if they are the outcome of genuinely free
functioning of market forces. There should be no interference in the free play of the forces of
demand and supply, so as to avoid injustice on behalf of suppliers of goods and consumers.
The holy Prophet has prohibited Ghaban-e-Fahish, which means selling something at a
higher price and giving the impression to the client that he is being charged according to
the market rate.
The price of any commodity is determined by keeping in mind the input and production
costs, storage, transportation and other costs, if any, and the profit margin of the trader. If
a person starts selling his goods in the market at less than the cost price out of his piety
and philanthropy, he will be creating problems for others, as a result of which the supply
of that commodity may suffer in the future and ultimately people may suffer. That is why
the second Caliph of Islam, Umar (Gbpwh), asked a trader who was selling at less than


----- p.69 (pdf 97) -----


The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics 69
the market price to raise the rate to the market level or leave the market. Islam cherishes
philanthropy, but requires that it must not create problems for genuine businesses.
However, if parties with vested interests hinder the proper functioning of market forces or
indulge in hoarding for creating artificial scarcity, the State or the regulators are duty bound
to take proper steps to ensure that the forces of demand and supply work genuinely and there
is no artificial manipulation. Therefore, to safeguard the interests of all stakeholders, the
Islamic state should not allow the creation of distortions. 46 However, permission to interfere
is subject to the condition that it is intended to remove market anomalies caused by impairing
the conditions of free competition.
Islamic banks will have to follow the rules prescribed by the Shar ¯ı´ah for trading and other
business. With regard to principles concerning operations in the market, the Jeddah-based
Council of the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the OIC in its fifth session (10–15th December,
1988) held that:
1. The basic principle in the Qur’ ¯an and the Sunnah of the holy Prophet (pbuh) is that a
person should be free to buy and sell and dispose of his possessions and money, within
the framework of the Islamic Shar ¯ı´ah in accordance with the divine Command: (“O you
who believe! Consume not each other’s property in vanities, unless there is trade based
on mutual acceptance”).
2. There is no restriction on the percentage of profit which a trader may make in his
transactions. It is generally left to the merchants themselves, the business environment
and the nature of the merchant and of the goods. Care should be given, however, to ethics
recommended by Shar ¯ı´ah, such as moderation, contentment and leniency.
3. Shar ¯ı´ah texts have spelt out the necessity to keep the transactions away from illicit acts
like fraud, cheating, deceit, forgery, concealment of actual features and benefits which
are detrimental to the well-being of society and individuals.
4. Government should not be involved in fixing prices except only when obvious pitfalls are
noticed within the market and prices due to artificial factors. In this case, the government
should intervene by applying adequate means to get rid of these factors, the causes of
defects, excessive price increases and fraud.
3.3.5 Freedom from Dharar (Detriment)
This refers to saving others from any harm due to a contract between two parties. The
concept of rights and liabilities is there in Islam like other systems. Of course, the rights are
much more strongly enforced in the Islamic framework, with a provision of right/option for
the informationally disadvantaged party to reverse its position. The State and regulators are
duty bound to ensure fair play and justice for all and that the forces with vested interests do
not create hardship for the masses.
If the regulators come to the conclusion that the majority of investors are naïve and
irrational, they can take a paternal approach to protect them from the unhealthy practices of
any of the market players. They also need to provide the general public necessary information
about the nature of business activities. Even if relevant information is available to them, they
may lack the ability to properly analyse that information, and may take irrational investment
decisions. Investors may also over-react to any disinformation and behave in an irrational
46 See Maududi, 1991, 2, pp. 15, 16 (under interpretation of verse 17: 34, 35).


----- p.70 (pdf 98) -----


70 Understanding Islamic Finance
way. In such cases, the State needs to take proper steps to guide the general investors so as
to protect them from losses that could be possible due to unhealthy practices in the market.
If a contract between two parties executed with their mutual consent is detrimental to the
interests of a third party, the latter may enjoy certain rights and options. A case in point is
the pre-emptive right (Shuf‘ah) of a partner in joint ownership. This pre-emptive right may
be extended by analogy to a situation where existing minority shareholders in joint stock
companies could be adversely affected by any decision of the controlling shareholders, such
as selling additional stocks to the public, effecting a change in management, mergers and
acquisitions, etc. 47
3.4 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
We have discussed the fundamental Islamic prohibitions, their implications for various
transactions, some encouragements regarding economic behaviour and Islamic commercial
ethics that have important bearing on financial transactions in the framework of Shar ¯ı´ah.
Riba, Gharar and games of chance are the main prohibitions which have to be avoided for the
conformity of transactions with the tenets of the Shar ¯ı´ah. In addition to these prohibitions,
Islam has prescribed a moral/behavioural standard that is almost common in all civilized
societies of the world.
Effort has been made to ascertain what constitutes Riba. Any increase over the principal
amount of a loan/debt against nothing but time is Riba. As a logical corollary to the
prohibition of Riba, the Shar ¯ı´ah has prohibited all benefits accruing to a person without any
labour, risk or expertise. Any person who wishes to earn profit on his monetary investment
must bear the loss or damages accruing to the business where his money capital has been used.
Lending in Islam is a virtuous activity since the lender has to give away the lent
goods/money to the borrower for the period of the loan without seeking any compensation.
If the value of that loan decreases due to inflation, it is as if the lender has done a larger
virtue. The Holy Qur’ ¯an encourages giving extra time to borrowers who are in difficulty or
faced with financial constraint. Therefore, the Fiqh Academy of the OIC has categorically
ruled out as strictly forbidden the commonly suggested solution of the indexation of a lent
amount of money to the cost of living, interest rates, GNP growth rates, the price of gold
or some other commodities. However, one can lend in terms of gold or any other currency
which is considered not vulnerable to inflation. In this case too, debt liability cannot increase
due to inflation.
Gharar means excessive uncertainty in any business or contract about the subject of a
contract or its price, or mere speculative risk. It leads to the undue loss of one party and
the unjustified enrichment of the other. It includes ambiguity/uncertainty about the ultimate
result of a contract and the nature and/or quality and specifications of the subject matter
of the contract or the rights and obligations of the parties. A sale or any other business
contract which entails an element of Gharar is prohibited. According to Shar ¯ı´ah scholars, to
become prohibited, a hazard or uncertainty would be major, remunerative, it should affect
the principal aspects of the contract, and it may not be the need of any valid contract like
that of Salam and Istisna‘a.
47 Obaidullah, n.d., p. 13.


----- p.71 (pdf 99) -----


The Main Prohibitions and Business Ethics 71
Gharar can be avoided if some standards of certainty are met. In the case of a valid Salam,
a number of conditions are required to be fulfilled. The vendor must be able to deliver the
commodity to the purchaser. It is prohibited to sell any undeliverable goods. The commodity
must be clearly known and its quantity must be determined to the contracting parties. Jahl
(ignorance) is a part of Gharar and means lack of clear understanding of the specifications
about the very nature of the contract or the subject matter.
The holy Prophet (pbuh) has prohibited some types of sale due to the Gharar element.
Most of these forms are rarely of concern in the present-day economic system. However,
many contemporary financial transactions like forwards, futures, options and other derivative
securities involve major Gharar to an extent which renders them invalid. Similarly, the
contracts where both the price and the commodity are to be delivered at a future date remain
inconclusive, and therefore invalid, due to the element of Gharar.
Gambling is a form of Gharar because the gambler is ignorant of the result of the gamble.
Governments and public/private sector corporations mobilize funds on the basis of lotteries
and draws, which come under the banner of gambling and are, therefore, prohibited. Draw-
based prize schemes launched by financial institutions are also repugnant to the tenets of the
Shar¯ı´ah due to the involvement of both Riba and Maisir.
Transactions should conform to certain ethical standards, e.g. trustworthiness in business
transactions and generosity in bargaining. Acts like false swearing, lying and hiding facts in
any bargains must also be avoided. Fair dealing encompassing honesty, straightforwardness,
free consent and negation of misstatement, misrepresentation and exaggerated description of
products are important pillars of business ethics as per Islamic Shar ¯ı´ah. Shar ¯ı´ah does not
approve of publicity which leads to concealing facts about the business, exaggeration about
the product or the financial position of any entity.


----- p.72 (pdf 100) -----




