
----- p.73 (pdf 101) -----


4
The Philosophy and Features of
Islamic Finance
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Islamic banking and finance has been conceived as banking and finance in consonance with
the ethos and value system of Islam. Hence, it is governed, in addition to the conventional
good governance and risk management rules, by the principles laid down by the Islamic
Shar¯ı´ah. In the 1980s, the term “interest-free banking” was used to describe an alternative
system to the conventional interest-based system. But the term “interest-free banking” is
a narrow concept, denoting a number of banking instruments or operations which avoid
interest. Islamic banking, a more general term, is expected not only to avoid interest-based
transactions, but also to avoid Gharar, also prohibited in the Islamic Shar ¯ı´ah, and other
unethical practices and to participate in achieving the goals and objectives of an Islamic
economy.
The above nature of business demarcates the philosophy and features of the emerging
discipline in the world of finance. In this chapter we shall be discussing the basic features of
Islamic finance directly affecting the products, instruments, institutions and markets in the
framework of business and finance. This includes avoiding interest, involvement in genuine
trade and other business, Kharaj bi-al-Daman and other requirements for profit entitlement
in various kinds of businesses, money earning money versus risk-based business and their
impact on banks, depositors and the fund users.
4.2 THE PHILOSOPHY OF ISLAMIC FINANCE
Islamic economics, of which Islamic finance is an important part, is broadly based on
some prohibitions and encouragements. The prohibition of Riba and permission to trade, as
enshrined in verse 2: 275 of the Holy Qur’ ¯an [Allah has allowed (profit from) trade and
prohibited Riba], drive the financial activities in an Islamic economy towards asset-backed
businesses and transactions. This implies that all financial transactions must be representative
of real transactions or the sale of goods, services or benefits. In addition, Islam has also
prescribed a moral/behavioural standard that is almost common in all civilized societies of
the world.
The structure of Islamic finance revolves around the prohibition of any return derived
on a loan/debt (Riba) and the legality of profit. Riba – commonly known as interest – is
an increase taken as a premium from the debtor. It represents the return on transactions
involving exchange of money for money, or an addition, on account of delay in payment, to
the agreed price on sale debts/debts. The Shar ¯ı´ah has prohibited it as it generates imbalances
in the economy. As all transactions involving interest payments are strictly prohibited, debt


----- p.74 (pdf 102) -----


74 Understanding Islamic Finance
contracts cannot be sold at a premium or discount, and exchange transactions of money or
goods representing money like gold and silver must be equal for equal and hand to hand.
While the term “equal for equal” is obvious, meaning that any increase on one side would
be Riba, the exchange of money as business must also be hand to hand, because otherwise,
a person can take benefit by the use of money/currency which he has received while he has
not given its counter value from which the other party could take benefit.
In the context of Islamic finance, a loan will be considered only a monetary or financial
transaction where only funds exchange hands with a guarantee for repayment in full without
any return for the creditor. It will not be considered an investment. Investment in the Islamic
context is not merely a financial or monetary transaction in which the transfer of funds is
the only activity. Investment will be considered only if it becomes a part of real activity
or is itself a real activity. Thus, purchasing a bond issued by a government or corporation
or making a deposit in a conventional bank in the form of a loan will not be considered
investment, because they are merely financial transactions and no real activity is involved.
However, if the funds are used to purchase real goods or services and then sell them on
at a profit, this use of funds will be treated as investment. But using the funds borrowed
on interest for buying or building a physical asset is not a permissible activity. Similarly,
buying and selling a financial document will not be an investment because no real activity
by the holder is involved in this exchange. As such, while earning on loans is prohibited by
virtue of it being interest, any return on investment is permissible and allowed.
In loan transactions, the exchange must be of equal amounts. If the borrowed commodity is
fungible, as currency notes are, exactly its like is to be repaid; and in the case of nonfungible
goods, the loan contract will be made in terms of money. 1 In the case of two similar goods,
the condition of excess payment of either is prohibited, even when it is a transaction of sale,
not a loan. The excess has been termed Riba. Thus, if one ton of wheat or 1000 dollars are
borrowed, one ton of wheat or 1000 dollars will be repaid; any excess shall be usurious.
Currency notes represent Thaman (price) and trading in Thaman has been declared by the
holy Prophet (pbuh) as usurious except when exchanged hand to hand and also equal for
equal (in case of similar currencies).
In addition to the negation of interest, Islamic finance does not approve involvement
in excessive risk-taking or any games of chance that also lead to exploitation and loss to
both or any of the parties to the contracts and to human society as a whole. One should
sufficiently know what one is giving and what one is getting in exchange in a contract.
This implies that certainty about the subject matter and its exchange value, transparency,
disclosure and free consent of the parties for entering into the contract are the important
factors in Islamic business and finance. A number of principles and rules stem from the
above given philosophy of Islamic finance and these are discussed below.
4.2.1 Avoiding Interest
Keeping in mind the two verses of the Holy Qur’ ¯an (II: 275, 279), jurists and Shar ¯ı´ah
scholars have developed a criterion that serves as a fundamental building block of the
Islamic theory of finance and economics. The most important feature of that theory is
avoiding interest or any ex ante return derived on a loan/debt (Riba). The lender, according
1 According to the Hanafites, only fungible goods may be lent or borrowed. Other schools of Islamic Fiqh, however, allow lending
of every kind of property; and in case similar is not available, its price will be paid to the lender (Al Jaziri, 1973, 2, p. 679).


----- p.75 (pdf 103) -----


The Philosophy and Features of Islamic Finance 75
to Shar ¯ı´ah tenets, has to give away the lent goods/money to the borrower for the period
of the loan without seeking any worldly compensation. Therefore, Islamic banks will not
take or give any loan or enter into contracts seeking any increase over the principal of
loans or debts created as a result of any credit transaction. Buying/selling goods, both on
cash payment and credit, for the purpose of earning profit is permissible. Pricing the goods,
keeping in mind the time given for payment of the price in credit transactions, is also
acceptable with the condition that it should not involve any addition or enhancement to
the principal amount of the debt created as a result of the sale transaction. This aspect
has been discussed in detail in Section 4.6 while discussing the concept of time value
of money.
This implies that once any debt is created, the seller cannot demand more than the credit
price stipulated in the sale or other contracts. Those who were involved in usurious trans-
actions at the time the Holy Qur’ ¯an was revealed protested and argued that lending on
interest was like an act of trade and that they should be allowed to add more and more
so long as the debtor did not pay. They were admonished through the revelation in the
Holy Qur’ ¯an that while “trade” was permitted, “Riba” was forbidden. Any increase over the
receivable of the sale was Riba and in loans or debts they were entitled to their principal
sums only. Therefore, lending on interest is alien to Islamic banks and financial institu-
tions. In case of any debts created by way of trade or Ijarah transactions, they are not
allowed to charge anything over and above the principal of the debt. They are not allowed
to charge costs of funds or rent on money in short-, medium- or long-term loans, over-
drafts, guarantees, financing against bills, receivables or other instruments or sell their debt
instruments.
4.2.2 Avoiding Gharar
Avoiding Gharar is another main principle of Islamic finance. Gharar, as discussed in
detail in the previous chapter, refers to entering into a contract in absolute risk or uncer-
tainty about the ultimate result of the contract and the nature and/or quality and spec-
ifications of the subject matter or the rights and obligations of the parties. Gharar is
also involved if there is a lack of adequate value-relevant information (Jahl) or there
is inadequacy and inaccuracy of any vital information which leads to uncertainty and
exploitation of any of the parties. Deceit, fraud or deliberate withholding of value-relevant
information is tantamount to Gharar. Islamic banks should not engage in any bargain
in which the result is hidden, as they would not be certain whether the delivery could
or would be made, which is necessary for the completion of any genuine business
transaction.
The current practices of financial institutions and insurance companies in the futures and
options markets are un-Islamic because of the elements of Gharar, interest, gambling, etc.
The transactions of contemporary stock markets, if cleansed of these elements, would be
Islamic.
The prohibition of Gharar requires Islamic banks not to engage in speculative trade in
shares, short-selling, discounting of bills and securities or trading in unidentified items.
Similarly, Islamic investment banks’ involvement in IPOs of joint stock companies would
require care to avoid Gharar, as information asymmetry between the investors and promoters
in the early stages of companies’ establishment may involve Gharar. Trading in derivatives
also involves Gharar and, therefore, is a grey area for Islamic banks.


----- p.76 (pdf 104) -----


76 Understanding Islamic Finance
4.2.3 Avoiding Gambling and Games of Chance
Another kind of activity which IFIs have to avoid is gambling/games of chance, which
again have been discussed in detail in the previous chapter. All instruments like prize bonds
or lotteries in which coupons or tabs are given and inducement or incentives are provided
by an uncertain and unknown event depending on chance, or disproportionate prizes are
distributed by drawing of lots or where the participating persons intend to avail themselves
of chance at prizes are repugnant to the injunctions of Islam. Similarly, a scheme wherein
the investors’ money is safe and intact, but the prizes to be given are related to interest
generated from capital accumulated through it, does not conform to the injunctions of Islam
due to involvement of both Riba and Qim ¯ar.
Gambling is involved in a number of financial transactions and conventional banks’
schemes/products, which Islamic banks have to avoid. Conventional insurance is not
Shar¯ı´ah-compliant due to the involvement of both Riba and Maisir. Governments and pub-
lic/private sector corporations mobilize resources on the basis of lotteries and draws, which
come under the banner of gambling and are, therefore, prohibited. Present futures and options
contracts that are settled through price differences only are covered under gambling. More
relevant to the discussion in this regard are lotteries or prize-carrying schemes/bonds that
conventional institutions launch from time to time. This is because only a small number
of the participants of such schemes get a prize at the cost of other bondholders, without
undertaking any liability or doing work for it.
4.2.4 Alternative Financing Principles
In the absence of interest as a basis of financing, Islamic banks have a number of techniques
and tools to do their business. Briefly, they will invoke the participation and sharing principle
applicable in Musharakah, Mudarabah and their variants, the deferred trading principle
applicable in respect of credit and forward sales (Mu’ajjal and Salam), a combination of
techniques like Shirkah and Ijarah, Murabaha and Salam/Istisna‘a, etc. and return-free loans
in specific situations and in consultation with various stakeholders.
Below we give the major forms of Islamic finance so that readers can easily understand
the discussion with respect to the philosophy of Islamic banking: 2
1. Mudarabah is a partnership arrangement in which one party provides capital to the
partnership while the other party provides entrepreneurial skills. Any loss is borne by the
financier; any profit is shared by the partners according to a pre-agreed ratio.
2. Musharakah, another PLS arrangement, may take the form of a permanent equity invest-
ment, a partnership in a specific project having a fixed duration or a diminishing part-
nership (the bank’s share is reimbursed over time by the company acquiring funds),
especially for housing and other fixed asset financing that could be leased.
3. Murabaha–Mu’ajjal involves acquiring goods upon a customer’s demand or otherwise and
their credit sale at a profit margin. It results in debt covering the cost plus a profit margin.
This debt has to be paid back irrespective of profit or loss to the person or institution that
purchased on credit and suffered loss or the wares destroyed in his ownership. To this
effect, we come across a very important reference relating to the period of the second
Pious Caliph of Islam Umar (Gbpwh). As reported by Ibn-e-Jarir Tabari (d. 310 AH),
2 All these techniques are discussed in Part III.


----- p.77 (pdf 105) -----


The Philosophy and Features of Islamic Finance 77
“Hind bint-e Utbah came to Umar and asked for a loan of 4000 (dinars) from the public
exchequer so that she could trade with it and became liable to pay back the same. After
getting the amount, she went to the area of banu kalb and engaged in trading; but she
suffered loss. Umar (Gbpwh) said the loan could not be waived as it was from the public
exchequer.”3
4. Salam involves providing funds against the forward purchase of precisely defined goods
with prepayments.
5. Ijarah involves leasing an asset and receiving rentals; so long as the asset is on lease, the
lessor owns the asset and the risk and reward of its ownership.
6. Istisna‘a involves engaging a person that could also be a financing agent to manufacture
or construct and supply an item at some future date for an explicit sum on periodic
payment. The agent contracts with a manufacturer to produce the commodity and the
customers make payments to cover the production price and the profit margin.
We can distribute the above modes into a number of categories, as given in Table 4.1,
which also shows the salient features of the various modes in terms of liquidity, rate of
return (known or unknown) and the nature of collateral or guarantee. The rate of return for
the banks is known in credit sales like Murabaha, Musawamah and in Ijarah. However, the
risk profile of trade and Ijarah is different and in the case of the latter, the bank will have
to bear the asset risk and the ownership related expenses. The net return in Ijarah would,
therefore, be quasi fixed.
Table 4.1 Features of various Islamic financing tools
Type of contract Liquidity Guarantee Rate of return
Debt-creating modes
Qard al Hasan — Collateral Nil
Credit sales Non-liquid Collateral Known
Salam Non-liquid Collateral Unknown/known
Istisna‘a Non-liquid Collateral Unknown/known
Semi-debt modes
Ijarah Liquid Collateral Known
Sharing modes
Musharakah Liquid Penalty for misconduct Unknown
Restricted Mudarabah Liquid Penalty for misconduct Unknown
General Mudarabah Liquid Penalty for misconduct Unknown
The return is basically unknown in Salam and Istisna‘a, as the bank cannot ascertain in
advance the price at which it will sell the asset when delivered under these contracts. But it
could be known to the bank to some extent, with the possibility of any change in income, if
it enters into a parallel contract or a promise with any party for disposal of the asset at any
stipulated price. If the promisor is unable to purchase the asset for any reason, the bank’s
income will certainly be affected. In the case of sharing modes, the return rate is not known
in advance.
3 Federal Shariat Court (FSC) Judgement, PLJ, 1992, FSC, 153 (cf Tabari, Ibne Jarir, Tarikh al Umam, 5, pp. 29, 30). Also in
University of the Punjab, 1973, 10, p. 775.


----- p.78 (pdf 106) -----


78 Understanding Islamic Finance
Security/Collateral
In all debt-creating modes, banks may ask the client to furnish security in the form of a
mortgage, a lien or a charge on any of his existing assets. In a forward purchase, banks
can ask the client to furnish security to ensure that he shall deliver the commodity on the
agreed date. In PLS modes, the bank can also ask for security against the nonperformance
of the contract. But the bank is not entitled to enforce the collateral in the case of loss in the
business if loss has occurred without any misconduct or negligence on the part of the client
partner.
Liquidity
The feature of liquidity means the possibility or ease with which the bank can sell
the related assets to get cash when needed. As Murabaha receivables cannot be sold
like debt instruments are sold in conventional finance, they are considered non-liquid
assets. The same is true of Salam and Istisna‘a. Assets or instruments representing assets
in Ijarah or sharing modes are liquid because the same can be sold in the secondary
market.
4.2.5 Valid Gains on Investment
All gains on investment or principal of a business are not prohibited. 4 On the basis of the
overall principles indicated by the Shar ¯ı´ah, scholars have identified methods of gainful
deployment of surplus resources with the objective of enhancing their value. Profit has
been recognized as a “reward” of capital and Islam permits gainful deployment of surplus
resources. The ex post profit, allowed by the Shar ¯ı´ah, symbolizes entrepreneurship and the
creation of additional wealth. However, along with the entitlement to profit, the liability of
risk of loss rests with the capital itself; no other factor can be made to bear the burden of
the loss on capital.
Financial transactions, in order to be permissible and for the purpose of earning profit,
should be associated with tangible real assets. In the Islamic framework, money itself is not
recognized as capital, and as such it cannot earn a profit in itself. The provider of funds is an
entrepreneur as well. He will get a profit/loss for his capital and a wage/remuneration for his
entrepreneurship/labour.5 If he does not manage the business himself and provides capital
to any other individual/group of individuals for any business, he will have a share in the
profit while the manager of the business will get “wages” in the form of a share in the profit.
But if the business suffers a loss, the capital owner will bear the loss while the manager’s
labour will go wasted. Thus, earning of profit, depending upon the outcome of the business,
is permissible. Keeping in mind this principle, it can be said that one can earn profit on his
investment or financing but that has to be related to certain assets exposed to direct or indirect
business risk.
4 Islam not only encourages investment for the purpose of gain but also considers the productive investment obligatory. The holy
Prophet is reported to have said: “He who sells a house [without need], but does not invest the proceeds in something similar, God
will not bless the proceeds”. Caliph Umar used to say: “He who has wealth, let him develop it and he who has land let him cultivate
it”. See Chapra, 1993, p. 98.
5 Labour means both human bodily and mental exertion. Thus, entrepreneurship is not an independent factor of production.


----- p.79 (pdf 107) -----


The Philosophy and Features of Islamic Finance 79
All Pre-fixed Returns are not Riba
It is also not necessary for the sake of Shar ¯i´ah compliance that income from any invest-
ment/transaction should be variable. In a number of structures it could be fixed and even
then Shar¯i´ah compliant.
To ascertain the Shar ¯ı´ah position of any types of transaction, we will have to look at their
nature. If it is a loan or a credit transaction culminating in a debt, such loans/debts cannot
fetch any increase whatsoever. In the sale of goods or their usufructs, however, one can make
a profit as per the rules of the Shar ¯ı´ah relating to the respective transactions. In trade, a
person can sell any commodity, not including money, for one price on a cash-and-carry basis
and for a higher price on a deferred payment basis. Cash or credit prices in the market should
be determined by market forces. However, this is subject to certain conditions, the fulfilment
of which is necessary to differentiate between interest and legitimate profit. The following
points may be kept in mind to differentiate various transactions in terms of deciding their
permissibility or otherwise:
• Bai‘ (sale/purchase of goods) means the definite transfer of ownership of goods to the
buyer against the payment of a price that can be on the spot, delayed (in a credit sale)
or in advance (in Salam). The risk and reward relating to the sold goods will belong to
the buyer, who will be required to pay the price irrespective of the manner in which he
has used them or the profit/loss to him in business. As such, Islamic banks will have no
recourse to the sold goods for the purpose of Murabaha rollover. The banks price the
goods and the debt is created; now the goods belong to their clients, they have no right
to re-price them.
• Hibah (gift) means the permanent transfer of ownership of assets free of any payment.
After having given a gift, one cannot take it back except with the consent of the person
to whom the gift was given.
• Riba (Al-Nasiah) means giving something or money temporarily to others’ ownership
against payment; this involves interest and is therefore prohibited. If this temporary trans-
fer of ownership of goods/assets is free of any payment, it is called Qard al Hasan/Tabarru‘
and Islam encourages this activity.
• Ijarah refers to the transfer of the usufruct of assets against payment of rent. Rental is
allowed subject to the condition that the lessor bears the risk and expenses relating to
ownership of the leased asset. There should be no confusion in this regard about interest
vis-à-vis the concept of rent in Ijarah (leasing). It might be argued, for example, that as
per approved Shar ¯ı´ah principles, predetermined rent including a time value of money
is allowed; therefore, a predetermined time value of money in loans/debts should also
be permitted by analogy. This argument does not have any substantive basis. The rent
in leasing is calculated on the basis of the capacity of the asset to give usufruct, which
is, in principle, uncertain. Hence, it remains uncertain how much time value of money
is actually realized until the asset has completed its economic life. The lessor, as owner
of the leased assets, is also the owner of the risk and reward associated with that asset.
Further, anything which cannot be used without consuming its corpus during its use
cannot be leased out, like money, yarn, edibles, fuel, etc., because when an asset no
longer exists, how can the lessor bear the ownership-related risk? All such things/assets,
the corpus of which is not consumed with their use, can be leased out against fixed
rentals. As such, one can lease out his asset to others for use against fixed/stipulated
rental(s). While aeroplanes, ships, houses, motor vehicles, etc. can be leased out against


----- p.80 (pdf 108) -----


80 Understanding Islamic Finance
fixed rentals, money/goods representing monetary units, edible items, petrol, etc. cannot
be leased out; such items can be sold/bought or loaned and in the latter case exactly their
like has to be given back or repaid.
The above discussion implies that Islamic banks can charge a fixed profit if they engage
in trading and leasing. In loaning, however, or in the case of any debt or receivable emerging
from credit transactions, they cannot charge any amount over and above the amount of the
loan or the debt once created.
Variable Rates on Investments
Partnership-based modes (Musharakah, Mudarabah and their variants, collectively called
Shirkah) give variable returns to the investors. Shirkah is the major mode used by Islamic
banks for mobilizing deposits and funds from savers/investors, who get a variable return
based on the result of the business conducted by the banks with their funds. Use of these
modes on the assets side would yield a variable return for the banks. However, products
can be structured in such a way that investors get a quasi-fixed return. This is possible
when Shirkah-based investment is attached to fixed earning modes like trade and Ijarah.
Examples are Diminishing Musharakah on the basis of Shirkatulmilk and securitization
through Shirkah.
The business risk involved in Shirkah-based modes is more than the risk in trade or
Ijarah-based modes discussed above. The partners of a business conducted on the basis of
Shirkah are at liberty to determine, with mutual consent, the ratio of profit allocation for
each of them. The loss to be suffered by each partner must be exactly in the proportion
of his investment. As the risk is high, normally the profit is also high in such modes. A
number of empirical studies have proved that Shirkah-based or equity financing is widely
used in various parts of the world and has many advantages over debt-based financing. 6
However, Islamic banks and financial institutions have not yet fully explored the potential
of Shirkah-based investments.
Benchmarks/Reference Rates
Financial institutions, while working in a competitive and regulated environment, require
reference rates or scales for executing and pricing the contracts. Benchmarks make admin-
istration and regulation by the banks’ management and the central banks easy, effective
and transparent. Different benchmarks are required for different kinds of financial contracts.
Juristic rules underlying the theory of Islamic finance accept the presence of such bench-
marks. In Fiqh literature, we come across discussions on Ujratul-mithl (matching wage),
Ribh-al-mithl (matching rate of profit), Qir ¯ad mithl (matching rate in Qir ¯ad/Mudarabah) and
Musaqat mithl (matching rate in crop sharing). Shar ¯ı´ah scholars allow banks to get service
charges on loans provided by them on the basis of Ujratul-mithl. 7 The word “mithl” is used
to denote a remuneration or compensation which has to be given in case the underlying
contract(s) become voidable (F ¯asid) due to nonfulfilment of any condition required for valid
contracts of Bai‘, Ijarah or Shirkah. This indicates a rate of wage, hire or return generally
6 See Zaman and Zaman, 2001.
7 Usmani, 1999, p. 147.


----- p.81 (pdf 109) -----


The Philosophy and Features of Islamic Finance 81
payable in the situation when a party to the contract has done some job or undertaken a
responsibility but is not entitled to any remuneration due to any problem in contractual
terms; he is then paid any customary compensation. This implies a generally prevalent rate
in the market at any point in time. Such rates of return, prevalent in the market under varying
situations of business, are taken for granted as a guiding indicator. 8
For conventional finance there is only one benchmark or reference rate (the interest
rate). Islamic finance requires two benchmarks: one for debt/semi-debt contracts and the
other for non-debt (equity) contracts. Therefore, two reference scales are needed: the price
(mark up/rent) reference scale and the sharing ratio reference scale, through the central bank
Mudarabah ratio or inter-bank Mudarabah ratio.
The benchmarks should be decided by market forces provided there are no distortions of
a gross nature. Islamic banks working in parallel with conventional banks normally use the
same benchmark as the conventional banks are using. According to the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars,
using any interest-based benchmark for the pricing of goods and their usufruct in trade and
Ijarah-based activities of Islamic banks does not make their operations un-Islamic so long
as other rules of trade and Ijarah are applied. 9
4.2.6 Entitlement to Profit – With Risk and Responsibility
The assumption of business risk is a precondition for entitlement to any profit over the
principal. The important Shar ¯ı´ah maxim: “Al Kharaj bi-al-Daman” or “Al Ghunm bil
Ghurm” is the criterion of legality of any return on capital, meaning that one has to bear
loss, if any, if he wants to get any profit over his investment. Profit has to be earned by
sharing risk and reward of ownership through the pricing of goods, services or usufruct of
goods.
Investment in the Islamic context is not merely a financial or monetary transaction in
which transfer of funds is the only activity. Investment, both by banks’ depositors and the
financial institutions, will be considered only if it is a part of real activity or is itself a
real activity. This is because money has the potential for growth when it joins hands with
entrepreneurship. In itself, it is not recognized as capital and, therefore, it cannot earn a
return.
In all economic activities there could be some commercial risk and one has to bear that
risk for the validity of the profit or earnings. In other words, the return on invested funds
that plays a productive role in any business is a factor in the willingness and ability to cause
“value addition” and bear the risk of a potential loss in the business. Reward should depend
on the productive behaviour of the business where funds are used, implying that interest,
lotteries, gambling, etc. are prohibited, because return in respect of them either does not
accept the business risk or is based on pure luck, chance or hazard.
In debt-creating modes, Islamic banks will face credit/party risks, ownership transfer risks,
market risks, commodity risks, price or rate of return risks, legal and documentational risks
and other mode-specific risks. Remaining within the Shar ¯ı´ah principles, Islamic banks are
allowed to take risk mitigation/management measures. Hence, risk can be mitigated but not
totally eliminated. Transfer of commercial risk to anyone else without transferring the related
reward is not permissible.
8 For details, see Hasanuz Zaman, paper read at IRTI, IDB upon getting the IDB Prize on Islamic Economics.
9 Usmani, 2000a, pp. 118–120.


----- p.82 (pdf 110) -----


82 Understanding Islamic Finance
The principle is that ownership cannot be separated from the risk of related loss. This has
important implications for various transactions. In loans, there is no entitlement to any profit
because the creditor gets back the full amount, irrespective of the nature of use by the debtor
or the fact the debtor incurred loss in his business which he undertook with the borrowed
money. In trade, so long as the asset remains with the seller, he has to bear the risk of its
destruction; as soon as he sells it, the risk is transferred to the buyer and in the case of a
credit sale, the buyer has to pay the price at the settled time even if the asset is destroyed
for any reason. He can mitigate the risk by way of Takaful but it will have no link with his
liability to pay the price. In Ijarah, the lessor is entitled to rent only when he keeps the asset
in usable form by incurring ownership-related expenses and undertakes the risks associated
with the asset.
The business risk involved in Shirkah-based modes is far more than that involved in
trading modes like Murabaha, Salam and Ijarah, because in Shirkah, all business loss has
to be borne by the capital while the manager or the entrepreneur loses his labour in the
case of loss in a joint business. For depositors in Islamic banks, risk stems from the failure
of business and uncertainty regarding the level of profit to be shared. This risk does not
discourage depositors; rather it justifies the profit and as such we see that Islamic banks’
deposits are increasing continuously. For banks, financing on the basis of Shirkah involves
risk because clients could disguise the profits and they may lose even the principal, because
loss in Islamic finance means loss of capital and not any decrease in the expected profit.
Although investment depositors participate in PLS, there arises the question of whether
they should bear only the market risks or also the risks related to fraud, carelessness,
mismanagement and loan concentration. There is, however, a consensus that the depositors
should not be burdened on account of negligence and follies on behalf of the management.
Experts consider it desirable to protect them against these risks to raise their confidence
in the financial system and to make the banks’ management as well as the supervisory
authorities more careful in their risk management and regulation of the banks respectively.
4.2.7 Islamic Banks Dealing in Goods not in Money
Conventional banks deal in money: they get money from the public as loans and pay them
interest; they give advances to needy people or firms in the form of money and charge them
interest. In domestic or foreign trade financing activities or even in the case of finance lease,
goods are also involved, but they have no concern with the goods or assets themselves; their
main concern is with financing the purchase of goods and for that purpose they also deal in
documents to facilitate the trading of goods. As such, there is a famous quote in conventional
banking: “Banks deal in documents not in goods”. They undertake no responsibility or risk
in respect of the subject of the contracts and their counter payments or price.
In contrast, Islamic banks deal in goods and documents and not in money. They use
money only as a medium of exchange for purchasing the goods for the purpose of leasing or
selling onward, thereby earning income or profit. In this process they also use documents for
executing sale and lease contracts, keeping in mind the Shar ¯ı´ah principles and facilitating
the operations.
The above discussion reveals that Islamic banks intermediate between savers/investors
and fund users by involving certain goods and assets or papers representing ownership of
real assets. In Salam or Murabaha, for example, the banks deal in certain commodities,
not money. They purchase the goods directly or through their agent (under a Wakalah


----- p.83 (pdf 111) -----


The Philosophy and Features of Islamic Finance 83
arrangement), at their own discretion for maintaining inventory, or upon an order by their
client. The banks take on ownership and the related risks and then sell them at cost plus
a profit margin, just like traders. After the execution of a sale, the risk transfers to the
clients who will be bound to pay the price at the settled time. In Istisna‘a, the manufacturers
manufacture the asset and deliver it to the bank along with all related assets and market
risks.
In Salam, they receive goods against which they have made prepayments; after that, the
asset risk and the price risk is theirs and not the Salam seller’s. Contemporary scholars have
suggested a parallel contract of Salam whereby a bank may sell a commodity purchased
through Salam for the same date of delivery or even the quantity. Scholars are of the view
that as long as the original and the parallel Salam contracts are not linked together or made
conditional on each other in any way, there is no restriction on the terms of the parallel
Salam contract, which is a new and independent contract that should be honoured regardless
of whether the first Salam contract is honoured or not.
Involvement in forward trading of goods on the basis of Salam and Istisna‘a not only has
great potential for developing the agricultural and rural micro-finance market, but also for
making the future of the majority of people living in rural areas secure. However, forward
foreign exchange operations with delayed payment of any of the currency of exchange and
most types of financial futures are not available in the Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant system, because
these instruments are hedging strategies of the interest-based system. The spot foreign
exchange market can function without any problem.
In Ijarah, Islamic banks have to deal in physical assets; they purchase the assets for lease
to the clients. So long as the asset remains on lease, its ownership and related risks/expenses
remain with the bank; if the asset is damaged without any fault on the part of the lessee and
it is not able to deliver the normally intended benefit, the bank’s right to receive rental will
cease. For transfer of the asset’s ownership to the lessee, there must be a separate sale or
gift agreement with all related conditions.
In Musharakah- and Mudarabah-based investments, Islamic banks’ earnings depend on
the result of economic activity undertaken by the client, and they will share the profit as per
agreed ratios and bear the loss as per their share in the capital of Shirkah business.
In addition to the above business activities, Islamic banks may provide services against
service charges or management fees. However, they cannot receive any fee on lending
operations as cost of funds, as that would amount to Riba. Similarly, any penalty in case of
default by the clients in paying their debts will not be credited to their Profit & Loss Sharing
Statements.
Islamic banks also earn non-fund-based income. Besides the charges for transfer of funds
or making payments on behalf of clients, they may engage in fund management against fixed
fees under the contract of Wakalatul Istismar as a part of their non-fund-based activities.
Under this arrangement, all profit/loss will be that of the client(s) and the banks will be
entitled to a fixed management fee against their service for managing the clients’ investment.
4.2.8 Transparency and Documentation
Islamic banks and financial institutions are required to adopt transparency, disclosure and
documentation to a greater extent than the conventional banks. Lack of transparency in
respect of Murabaha transactions, where Islamic banks are required to provide all details of
the cost/price and the payment mode, may render the transaction non-Shar ¯ı´ah compliant.


----- p.84 (pdf 112) -----


84 Understanding Islamic Finance
The Holy Qur’ ¯an enjoins us to write down and take witnesses in all transactions that involve
credit one way or the other. Similarly, the holy Prophet (pbuh) himself encouraged disclosure
of all features of goods being traded and the competitive environment in which people
get sufficient information about goods and their prices in the market. The Islamic banks’
disclosure standards are stringent because their role is not limited to a passive financier
concerned only with interest payments and loan recovery. Islamic financing modes are used
to finance specific physical assets like machinery, inventory and equipment. Hence, clients
of Islamic finance must have business which should be socially beneficial, creating real
wealth and adding value to the economy rather than making profit out of antisocial or merely
paper transactions.
An Islamic bank is a partner in trade and has to concern itself with the nature of business
and profitability position of its clients. To avoid loss and reputational risk, the Islamic banks
have to be extra vigilant about their clientele. As such, I believe Islamic banks are less
likely to engage in illegal activities such as money laundering and financing of terrorism
than conventional banks.
4.2.9 Additional Risks Faced by Islamic Banks
Even though Islamic banks can genuinely take collateral for extending finance, they cannot
rely on it heavily because of the risks associated with various transactions. They are,
therefore, under obligation to carry out a more careful evaluation of the risks involved. The
additional risks that Islamic financial institutions have to face are asset, market and Shar ¯ı´ah
non-compliance risks, greater rate of return risks, greater fiduciary risks, greater legal risk
and greater withdrawal risk.
Asset risk is involved in all modes, particularly in Murabaha (before onward sale to the
client), Salam (after taking delivery from the Salam seller) and Ijarah, as all ownership-
related risks belong to the bank so long as the goods are in its ownership. In Shirkah-based
modes, risk is borne as per the share in the ownership. Certain developments in the economy
or the government’s trade policy may affect the demand and prices of goods, leading to asset,
price and rate of return risks. Receivables created under Murabaha cannot be enhanced even
if the general market rate (benchmark) rises. In the case of non-Shar ¯ı´ah compliance, not
only would the related income go to the Charity Account, but it may also lead to creditability
risk for an Islamic bank, which in turn may lead to withdrawal risk and the “contagion
effect” for the Islamic finance industry. Banks’ involvement in physical assets may also lead
to greater legal risks than the conventional banks have to face.
The results of a survey of 17 Islamic financial institutions conducted by Khan and Habib
(2001) confirms that Islamic financial institutions face some risks arising from profit-sharing
investment deposits that are different from those faced by conventional financial institutions.
The bankers consider these unique risks more serious than the conventional risks faced by
financial institutions. The Islamic banks feel that returns given on investment deposits should
be similar to those given by other institutions. They strongly believe that the depositors will
hold the bank responsible for a lower rate of return and this may cause withdrawal of funds
by them. The survey also shows that Islamic bankers judge profit-sharing modes of financing
and product-deferred sales (Salam and Istisna‘a) to be more risky than Murabaha and Ijarah.
The survey further reveals that while Islamic banks have established a relatively good risk
management environment, the measuring, mitigating and monitoring processes and internal
controls need to be further upgraded. The growth of the Islamic financial industry will,


----- p.85 (pdf 113) -----


The Philosophy and Features of Islamic Finance 85
to a large extent, depend on how bankers, regulators and Shar ¯ı´ah scholars understand the
inherent risks arising in these institutions and take appropriate policies to cater for these
needs. The problems facing Islamic banks, as identified by the survey, include lack of money
market instruments and a legal and regulatory framework that is not supportive to them and
could be a source of systemic risk.
Mitigation of the risks would require special expertise and sound knowledge of Shar ¯ı´ah
rules, lest it may lead to non-Shar ¯ı´ah compliance. Shar ¯ı´ah has identified the respon-
sibilities/liabilities of the parties in respect of every contract and one cannot avoid that
responsibility/liability. Thus, Islamic banks can manage risk to a certain limit beyond which
they will have to take up the risk/loss. In Ijarah, the risk of asset loss (if not due to any
negligence of the lessee) will be that of the bank, it cannot ask the lessee to bear the risk
in addition to paying the rent. 10 The bank will have to bear the cost of managing the risk,
although it can build such costs into rentals with the free and mutual consent of the lessee
and subject to related juristic rules. In Mudarabah, the bank, as a Mudarib, cannot get any
remuneration if the Mudarabah business incurs loss.
For goods purchased under Salam, the bank can transfer the price and asset risk to any
other party through Parallel Salam. But the responsibility of the original and the parallel
contracts will remain independent of each other. The bank can also mitigate the asset and
market risk by entering into a promise to purchase by any prospective buyer.
Risk of default by clients can be mitigated by putting a penalty clause in the contract
to serve as a deterrent; the amount of penalty would go to the Charity Account. This is
the case in all modes except Istisna‘a, where the bank can insert a clause for a decrease in
the price of the asset in case of a delay in delivery. This clause is termed “Shart-e-Jaz ¯ai”
in Islamic jurisprudence. The logic behind this provision in the case of Istisna‘a is that
manufacturing/construction of any asset depends, to a large extent, on personal effort,
commitment and hard work by the manufacturer, who may start work on contracts with
other people, while in the cases of Murabaha and Salam, one party has to pay the deferred
liability that has been defined and stipulated in the contract.
4.3 DEBT VERSUS EQUITY
After discussing the basic ingredients of Islamic finance, we take up some related aspects
that will be helpful in fully understanding the philosophy of Islamic finance theory.
It transpires from the above discourse that debt has to remain a part of Islamic finance.
Islamic financial institutions, while providing a financial facility through trading activities,
create debt that is genuinely shown in their balance sheets. So the issue is not one of “debt
versus equity” but one of putting greater reliance on equity and subjecting the debt to the
principle of Shar¯ı´ah that debt, once created, should not increase on the basis of conventional
opportunity cost theory.
In many areas of business, Shirkah-based modes either cannot be used or are not advisable,
keeping in mind the risk profile of the investors. For example, a widow may require an
Islamic banker to invest her money in less risky but Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant business because
she is not in a position to bear the risk of loss that could arise in Shirkah-based business.
10 This is based on an important juristic rule: Al Ujrah wal Dham ¯an L ¯a Tajtami‘ ¯an ( Wage/rent and liability/responsibility do not
add up together).


----- p.86 (pdf 114) -----


86 Understanding Islamic Finance
The bank, as a trustee, would be bound to invest funds of such risk-averse investors in trade
and Ijarah-based activities. This gives rise to debt.
In line with the writings of the pioneers of the present movement of Islamic finance, many
authors, both economists and financial experts, have been saying that Shirkah or equity-
based modes are the only modes which can serve as an alternative to interest in the Islamic
framework. But this is not the case. Debt has existed forever, and will remain an important
part of individuals’ and nations’ economics. The holy Prophet (pbuh) himself incurred debt,
both for personal and also the State’s requirements, as will be discussed in Chapter 7. The
only point to be taken care of is that a debt should not carry “interest”. Therefore, debt
creating modes like Murabaha, Salam and Ijarah will remain as operating tools in the hands
of Islamic financial institutions. The issue is not the permissibility of debt-creating modes,
but a preference for equity-based modes over debt-creating modes.
Therefore, the aim is to create a healthy balance between debt-based and equity-based
financing for the prosperity of the economy and society. An economy with a heavy reliance
on debt could be highly risky. It is commonly said, for example, that in the US, personal
and public debt has reached a point where it is a cause for concern with respect to the
stability of the economy, a state which would have been reached already if not assisted by
the twin factors of the US being the only super power in the world and the US Dollar being
the reserve currency. The policies of the international financial institutions like the IMF, the
World Bank and the WTO are also helping the US economy to survive, in spite of incurring
heavy debts at the cost of the global economy.
4.4 ISLAMIC BANKING: BUSINESS VERSUS BENEVOLENCE
Islamic banks do business just like their counterparts on the conventional side, with the
difference of keeping in mind Shar ¯ı´ah compliance aspects. There has been a myth in some
circles that Islamic banks need to work as social security centres, providing only return-free
loans or charity to the needy and for benevolence. This myth has to be removed because
business and benevolence are two separate things. Individuals have the right to spend for
benevolence out of their income, for which they will be rewarded in the Hereafter as per
Shar¯ı´ah tenets. But the banks that hold depositors’ money as a trust are not allowed to dole
out the trust funds at their discretion.
Normally, the “middle class” in all societies keeps funds in banks that are used by business
groups, who are generally affluent and relatively richer than the masses in a society. Islamic
banks are doing business with the available funds and passing on a part of the income to the
fund owners – depositors or investors. Any bank may like to provide return-free loans out
of its own (equity) funds or accumulated “Charity Fund” with the approval of the Shar ¯ı´ah
advisor, or engage in other social security activities, but this should not negatively affect its
fiduciary responsibilities towards the depositors. To fulfil these responsibilities, banks will
undertake trading and Ijarah business, provide agency-based services against fees and adopt
all risk mitigation techniques remaining within the limits imposed by the Shar ¯ı´ah.
Islamic banks sell goods purchased by them at a profit, lease assets against rentals and
share the profit (or bear the loss) accruing from Shirkah-based investments. They help society
to develop by facilitating asset-based investment and the supply of risk-based capital. Subject
to the policies of their boards and in consultation with stakeholders, they can also take part
in social and welfare activities, but this will not reflect their normal course of business.


----- p.87 (pdf 115) -----


The Philosophy and Features of Islamic Finance 87
4.5 EXCHANGE RULES
Islamic banks’ activities, as discussed above, involve the exchange of goods for money,
which may take a number of forms like simultaneous exchange on the spot, spot delivery
and deferred payment and spot payment with deferred delivery. For such exchange contracts,
the Shar ¯ı´ah has advised exchange rules that are quite different from the rules applied in
conventional finance, which are very flexible due to the absence of any Shar ¯ı´ah-related
limitations. The most strategic difference between Islamic and conventional rules is that in
the latter case, both items of exchange in a transaction can be delayed/deferred and the goods
purchased and even the “options” sold onward without taking ownership of the underlying
assets or possession of the related risk.
In Islamic finance, only one of the items of an exchange contract can be delayed and goods
not owned or possessed cannot be sold. Exchange rules are different for different contracts
and types of wealth. Goods other than gold, silver and monetary units, durable assets and
shares representing pools of assets can be exchanged with money at market-based pricing
with at least one item of the exchange delivered on the spot. Gold, silver or any monetary
units (Athman) are subject to the rules of Bai‘ al Sarf, i.e. equal for equal and hand to hand
in the case of homogeneous currency, and hand to hand in the case of different units of
currency being exchanged. Usufruct and services (leasing/services) can be exchanged with
rentals/wages to be paid in advance, on the spot or deferred. Loans/debts have to be paid
without premium and discount and cannot be sold, except by recourse to the original debtor
and at face value.
The famous Hadith of the holy Prophet (pbuh) regarding the exchange of six commodities,
i.e. gold, silver, wheat, barley, dates and salt, has laid the foundation of these rules. These
commodities belong to two categories: two, gold and silver, can serve as monetary units
while the remaining four are edible goods. On this basis, jurists have identified two causes
(‘Illah) of prohibition and held detailed discussions on the rules in respect of application to
other goods, reaching consensus on a number of aspects.
The OIC Fiqh Council in its eleventh session (14–19th November, 1998) resolved: “It
is not permissible in Shar ¯ı´ah to sell currencies by deferred sale, and it is not permissible,
still, to fix a date for exchanging them. This is evidenced in the Qur’ ¯an, Sunnah and Ijm ¯a’.”
The Council observed that contemporary money transactions are major factors behind the
financial crises and instability in the world and recommended: “It is incumbent upon Muslim
governments to exercise control over money markets and to regulate their activities relating
to transactions in currencies and other money-related transactions, in accordance with the
principles of Islamic Shar ¯ı´ah, because these principles are the safety valve against economic
disaster”.
Explaining the rules of exchange, the OIC Fiqh Council in its ninth session (1–6th April,
1995) resolved the following regarding crediting a sum of money to the bank account of a
customer, in the following cases:
1. Where a sum of money has been credited to the account of the customer, either directly
or through a bank transfer.
2. Where a customer contracts a sale of “Sarf” by purchasing a currency for another currency
standing in his own account.
3. Where the bank, by order of the customer, debits a sum of money from his account and
credits it to another account, in another currency, either in the same bank or in another
bank, no matter whether it is credited in favour of the same customer or in favour of any


----- p.88 (pdf 116) -----


88 Understanding Islamic Finance
other person. But it is necessary for the banks to keep in mind the Islamic rules governing
the contract of “Sarf”.
If such crediting takes some time to enable the beneficiary to draw the amount so credited,
this delay can be allowed, provided that it does not exceed the usual period normally allowed
in such a transaction. However, the beneficiary of such crediting cannot deal in the currency
during the allowed period until the crediting takes its full effect by enabling the beneficiary
to draw the amount.
Explaining the relevance of this Hadith, Imam Nawavi, an eminent commentator of Sahih
Muslim,11 says that (in the case of all commutative contracts) when the effective cause
(‘Illah) of prohibition of exchange of two commodities is different, a shortfall/excess or
delay in payment are both permissible, as, for example, in the sale of gold or dollars for
wheat (the former being a medium of exchange and the latter an edible item); when the
commodities are similar, an excess/deficiency or delay in payment are both prohibited, e.g.
gold for gold or wheat for wheat; when the commodities are heterogeneous but the ‘Illah is
the same, as in the case of the sale of gold for silver or Rupees for Dollars (the common
‘Illah being their use as media of exchange) or of wheat for rice (the common ‘Illah being
edibility), then an excess/deficiency is allowed while a delay in payment is not allowed. As
such, futures trading in commodities like gold and silver that serve as Thaman is forbidden.
After analysis of the Fiqh literature on the exchange of similars, we come across the
following significant points:
• Exchange should be without any “excess”. It follows that the debt contract must be settled
with reference to the “original legal standard”. Money is used as a medium of exchange. 12
• Since the value of money can rise as well as fall during inflation and deflation respectively,
the settlement of a debt contract should be made in terms of the original date of agreement,
which can be taken as a base year. 13
We need to keep in mind the difference between the natures of sale and loan contracts.
An exchange in the form of loans, which intrinsically means a delay in repayment, must be
of equal amounts. This is because loaning is a virtuous act in which exactly the same/similar
amount has to be returned. If the borrowed commodity is fungible, as currency notes are,
exactly its similar is to be repaid; in the case of nonfungible goods, the loan contract needs
to be made in terms of money and in the case of two similar goods, the condition of excess
payment of either is prohibited, even when it is a transaction of exchange/sale, not a loan.
While barter transactions are very rare in the modern age and banks are not likely to
engage in such activities, foreign exchange dealings are included in the normal activities of
banks and financial institutions. It is imperative, therefore, that when a sale transaction is
taking place among currencies, the exchange has to take place instantly and not on a deferred
basis. There are numerous traditions of the holy Prophet (pbuh) to this effect.
As regards currency futures, some scholars forbid them while others distinguish between
the following two cases: the first is where one currency is delivered on the spot and the other
11 Discussion on ‘Illah can be seen in Sahih Muslim with annotation by Nawavi, 1981, 11, pp. 9–13. For the juristic views of
various scholars, see Al Muhallah, 7, pp. 403–426.
12 A famous Hadith about the dates of Khaiber may be referred to in this regard. In order to avoid Riba, dates of low quality were
sold in the market and then with the money received, dates of good quality bought (Muslim, 1981, 11, pp. 20, 21).
13 The holy Prophet advised a Companion accordingly (regarding stipulating price in dinars (gold) but paying in dirhams (silver);
Ibnul Qayyim, 1955, 4, p. 327).


----- p.89 (pdf 117) -----


The Philosophy and Features of Islamic Finance 89
is delayed; this is forbidden. The second, that is permitted, involves the future exchange of
both currencies at the previously agreed rate. Therefore, forward cover in currencies can be
taken in the form of a promise only for fulfilling the real exchange needs of the traders and
not for making speculative gains. The client would enter into a promise with the bank to
sell or purchase a certain amount of currency against the foreign currency at the agreed rate,
but the actual exchange of both currencies would be simultaneous.
Some scholars from the Indo-Pak subcontinent have suggested the use of Salam in Fulus
(coins of inferior metals). 14 However, the forward sale or purchase of currencies in the
form of Salam is not a valid contract. As described earlier, paper money can be used only
as a price; it cannot serve as a commodity to be sold in Salam. The counter values to be
exchanged in Salam include the price on the one hand and the commodity on the other. The
commodity is to be deferred in Salam and if the price is also deferred, the Salam contract
will mean the exchange of debt against debt, which is prohibited. If the price in Salam
is in US $, for example, and the commodity to be sold is Rupees, it will be a currency
transaction, which cannot be made through Salam because such an exchange of currencies
requires simultaneous payment on both sides, while in Salam, delivery of the commodity is
deferred.
4.6 TIME VALUE OF MONEY IN ISLAMIC FINANCE
There is almost a consensus among Shar ¯ı´ah scholars that the credit price of a commodity
can genuinely be more than its cash price, provided one price is settled before separation of
the parties. 15 According to many jurists, the difference between the two prices is approved
by the Nass (clear text of the Shar ¯ı´ah). The Islamic Fiqh Academy of the OIC and Shar ¯ı´ah
boards of all Islamic banks approve the legality of this difference. This is tantamount to the
acceptance of time value of money in the pricing of goods. What is prohibited is any addition
to the price once agreed because of any delay in its payment. This is because the commodity,
once sold (on credit), generates debt and belongs to the purchaser on a permanent basis and
the seller has no right to re-price a commodity that he has sold and which does not belong
to him.
As this is an aspect of far-reaching implication for Islamic finance, we may discuss
it in detail. Jurists allow the difference between cash and credit prices of a commodity,
considering it a genuine market practice. Both time and place have their impact on the price.
A commodity sold for 100 dollars in a posh area might be available for 50 dollars in a
middle class residential area. Similarly, an object with a price of 100 dollars in the morning
might be available for 50 in the evening. This is all acceptable in Shar ¯ı´ah if caused by
genuine market forces. Similarly, it is quite natural that the credit price of a commodity is
more than its cash price at a point in time, while in forward contracts like Salam, the future
delivery price is less than the spot price.
The concept of time value of money in the context of Shar ¯ı´ah is also established from
the fact that Shar ¯ı´ah prohibits mutual exchanges of gold, silver or monetary values except
when it is done simultaneously. This is because a person can take benefit from use of a
14 For detail see Usmani, 1994, pp. 38–42.
15 Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, pp. 476–477. Also see Thani, Ridza and Megat, 2003, p. 35.


----- p.90 (pdf 118) -----


90 Understanding Islamic Finance
currency which he has received while he has not given its counter value from which the
other party could take benefit.
The contract of Salam also provides ample illustration of the concept of time value of
money through pricing of goods. Salam is a forward contract which enables a commodity
to be bought for immediate payment of the price and future delivery. The basic element of
this contract is that the price paid in advance for future delivery of the goods is genuinely
less than the cash-n-carry price at the time the Salam contract is executed.
It further transpires from the Shar ¯ı´ah tenets that time valuation is possible only in business
and trade of goods and not in the exchange of monetary values and loans or debts. Islamic
economics has the genuine provision of converting money into assets on the basis of which
one can measure its utility, but loaning is considered a virtuous act from which one cannot
take any benefit. While it concedes the concept of time value of money to the extent of
pricing in credit sales, it does not uphold generating rent to the capital as interest does in
credits and advances, leading to a rentier class in a society. Valuation of the credit period for
pricing the goods or their usufruct is different from the conventional concepts of “opportunity
cost” or the “time value”. As such, “mark-up” in trade is permissible provided the Shar ¯ı´ah
rules relating to trade are adhered to, but interest is prohibited due to being an increase over
any loan or debt. Therefore, no time value can be added to the principal of a loan or a
debt after it is created or the liability of the purchaser stipulated. Time is invaluable; once
wasted, it cannot be refurbished. So it should not be compared with money, which, if stolen
or snatched, can be restored. In business, however, one keeps in mind the time factor as a
natural phenomenon to strike a fair balance between the forces of demand and supply. We
will discuss this aspect in Chapter 6.
On the basis of the above rationale, an overwhelming majority of Islamic economists
believe that economic agents in an Islamic economy will have a positive time preference
and there will be indicators available in the economy to approximate the rates of their
time preferences, generally determined by the forces of demand and supply. There is no
justification to assume a zero rate of time preference in an Islamic economy, as made in a
number of studies on investment behaviour in the Islamic perspective.
4.7 MONEY, MONETARY POLICY AND ISLAMIC FINANCE
Money is the most strategic factor in the functioning of any financial system. The status,
value, role and functions of money in Islamic finance are different from those in conven-
tional finance. In the conventional system, money is considered a commodity that can be
sold/bought and rented against profit or rent that one party has to pay, irrespective of the
use or role of the lent money in the hands of the borrower. As this is not the case in Islamic
finance, the philosophy, principles and operation of Islamic finance differ to a large extent
from the principles and operation of conventional finance.
Experts in Islamic economics concede the advantages of money as a medium of exchange.
The holy Prophet (pbuh) himself favoured the use of money in place of exchanging goods
with goods. The prohibition of Riba Al-Fadl in Islam is a step towards the transition to a
money economy and is also a measure directed at making barter transactions rational and
free from the elements of injustice and exploitation.


----- p.91 (pdf 119) -----


The Philosophy and Features of Islamic Finance 91
4.7.1 Status of Paper Money
As the banking and financial system revolves around money, this author decided to discuss
the matter of money as a part of the chapter on the features of Islamic finance. The present
form of money has evolved over time from various types of goods used as money and
metallic money to paper and electronic money. Money in the present form, or the currency
notes in vogue, are a kind of Thaman (a unit of account to serve as the price of anything),
just like gold and silver used to be in the past. In this form it is wanted only for exchange
and payments and not for itself, as it has no intrinsic value. Accordingly, the present fiat
or fiduciary money represents monetary value for all purposes of making payments; the
currencies of all countries are unlimited legal tender and creditors are obliged to accept them
for recovery of debt.
Linking money to productive purposes brings into action labour and other resources
bestowed by Allah (SWT) to initiate a process from which goods and services are produced
and benefits passed on to society.
Therefore, paper money is subject to all the tenets of Shar ¯ı´ah relating to Riba, debts,
Zakat, etc. One cannot sell a 10 dollar bill for 11 dollars because the bill represents pure
money and has no intrinsic value. Notes of any particular currency can be exchanged equal
for equal. Currency notes of different countries are considered monetary units of different
species and therefore can be exchanged without the condition of equality but subject to the
conditions of Bai‘ al Sarf (currency exchange), briefly discussed in foregoing paragraphs,
i.e. hand to hand.
The Shariat Appellate Bench of Pakistan’s Supreme Court says in this regard: “Today’s
paper money has practically become almost like natural money equal in terms of its facility
of exchange and credibility to the old silver and gold coins. It will, therefore, be subject to
the injunctions laid down in the Qur’ ¯an and the Sunnah, which regulated the exchange or
transactions of gold and silver”. 16 The Islamic Fiqh Council of the OIC in its third session
(11–16th October, 1986) also resolved that paper money was real money, possessing all the
characteristics of value, and subject to Shar ¯ı´ah rules governing gold and silver vis-à-vis
Riba, Zakat, Salam and all other transactions.
4.7.2 Trading in Currencies
Paper currencies cannot be sold or bought like goods having intrinsic value. The Shar ¯ı´ah
has treated money differently from commodities, especially on two scores: first, money (of
the same denomination) is not held to be the subject matter of trade, like other commodities.
Its use has been restricted to its basic purpose, i.e. to act as a medium of exchange and a
measure of value. Second, if for exceptional reasons, money has to be exchanged for money
or it is borrowed, the payment on both sides must be equal, so that it is not used for the
purpose it is not meant for, i.e. trade in money itself. In the context of trading in goods, as
distinct from exchange of various currencies, Shaikh M. Taqi Usmani in SAB Judgement
says: “The commodities can be of different qualities. Therefore, transactions of sale and
purchase are effected on an identified particular commodity. Money has no quality except
that it is a measure of value or a medium of exchange. All units of money of the same
denomination are one hundred per cent equal to each other. If A has purchased a commodity
16 Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, pp. 269–273.


----- p.92 (pdf 120) -----


92 Understanding Islamic Finance
from B for Rs.1000/ = he can pay any Note(s) of Rupee amounting to Rs.1000 /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmi”. This
real nature of money, which should have been appreciated as a fundamental principle of the
financial system, remained neglected for centuries, but it is now increasingly recognized by
modern economists. Professor John Gray (of Oxford University), in his recent work False
Dawn, has remarked:
“Most significantly perhaps, transactions on foreign exchange markets have now reached the
astonishing sum of around $1.2 trillion a day, over fifty times the level of world trade. Around
95 percent of these transactions are speculative in nature, many using complex new derivatives,
financial instruments based on futures and options. /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiThis virtual financial economy has a terrible
potential for disrupting the underlying real economy, as seen in the collapse in 1995 of Barings,
Britain’s oldest bank.”
The evil results of such an unnatural trade were pointed out by Imam Al-Ghazali 900
years ago in the following words:
“Riba (interest) is prohibited because it prevents people from undertaking real economic activities.
This is because when a person having money is allowed to earn more money on the basis of interest,
either in spot or in deferred transactions, it becomes easy for him to earn without bothering himself
to take pains in real economic activities. This leads to hampering the real interests of humanity,
because the interests of humanity cannot be safeguarded without real trade skills, industry and
construction.”17
4.7.3 Creation of Money from the Islamic Perspective
The monetary and credit policies in any economy have a great impact on the functioning of its
financial system through their impact on the quantity and value of money. As against bullion
money, paper or fiduciary money can be created simply by ledger entries or the issuing of
paper securities and without regard to a corresponding increase in goods and services in an
economy. This leads to distortions and exploitation of a segment in society by others. In
the Islamic financial system, where exploitation of one by another is strictly prohibited, the
supply or growth of money/credit should match the supply of goods and services. There
might be some minor mismatches, but persistent mismatches are not consistent with the
principle of Islamic finance, as they generate distortions in the payments system and injustice
to any of the parties to the contracts.
Of all the features of Islamic financial instruments, one stands out distinctly – that these
instruments must be real asset-based. This means that Islamic banks are not able to create
money out of nothing or without the backing of real assets, as is the case in the conventional
system today. They can only securitize their asset-based operations for the purpose of
generating liquid funds, transferring thereby their ownership to the security holders along
with their risk and reward. The financing of government budget deficits by Islamic banks
and financial institutions will not be possible until the governments have sufficient real
assets to raise funds in a Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant manner or for the conversion of debt stock into
Shar¯ı´ah-compliant securities.
To ensure this, it is important for the regulators to monitor the three sources of mone-
tary expansion namely, financing of government budgetary deficits by borrowing from the
central bank – the major source of expansion, the secondary credit creation by commercial
17 Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, Taqi Usmani’s part of Judgement, paras 135–152.


----- p.93 (pdf 121) -----


The Philosophy and Features of Islamic Finance 93
banks and the exogenous factors. The central bank would gear its monetary policy to the
generation of growth in the money supply, which is neither “inadequate” nor “excessive”
but just sufficient to exploit fully the capacity of the economy to supply goods and services
for broad-based welfare.
Commercial banks’ deposits constitute a significant part of the overall money supply.
These deposits may be “primary deposits”, which provide the banking system with the base
money (cash-in-vault + deposits with the central bank) or “derivative deposits”, which, in
a proportional reserve system, represent money created by commercial banks in the process
of credit extension and constitute a source of monetary expansion. Since derivative deposits
also lead to an increase in money supply, the expansion in derivative deposits needs also to
be regulated if the desired monetary growth is to be achieved. This could be accomplished by
regulating the availability of base money to the commercial banks and restricting the banks
from making the “cash reserves” ineffective through their reserve-sweep programmes. 18
Corrective measures would be needed to set aside the impact of exogenous factors as
far as possible. These measures would include the use of monetary tools, e.g. mopping
up liquidity in case the money supply increases due to capital inflows and investing the
funds in commodity-producing avenues so that the increase in money supply is matched by
an increase in the supply of goods and services with a proper gestation period and in the
long run.
The whole discussion on the creation of money and credit in the available literature on
Islamic finance is centred on the assumption that the Islamic finance model is based on a
two-tier Mudarabah or Shirkah system for the mobilization and use of funds. Although the
Islamic banking system in vogue is not based on this model and Islamic banks are using
fixed-income modes, yet it is worthwhile to briefly discuss the stance of Islamic economists
on this important area with far-reaching implications.
The institution of credit and bank money has been an important key issue discussed by
Islamic economists. Early writers on Islamic economics saw something morally wrong in
credit money. Some doubted its need and ascribed its proliferation to the vested interests
of the banks that gain a lot out of thin air or of no air at all, create an artificial purchasing
power and take advantage of the demand for it. This demand is also illicitly created by
those who have managed to liquidate their assets and prefer to enjoy a guaranteed income
against their withheld money. They advocate a 100 % reserve system. Such economists say
that if any extra money is needed for financing fresh transactions, it should be issued by the
central bank.
Those who favour credit creation have argued that in the Islamic system of banking,
credit will be created only to the extent that genuine possibilities of creating additional
wealth through productive enterprise exist. Demand for profit-sharing accommodation will
be limited by the extent of the available resources and the banks’ ability to create credit will
be called into action only to the extent of this demand, subject to the constraint imposed by
profit expectations that satisfy the banks and their depositors. They say that credit should
not be ascribed in any way as being the child of interest, as banks’ ability to create credit is
independent of the terms and conditions on which it is created.
All Islamic economists, however, realize that interest is the villain and if a measured
amount of credit and money is generated in the market without the involvement of interest,
18 For the latest tactics of conventional banks in creating fictitious money and their impact, see Hatch, 2005.


----- p.94 (pdf 122) -----


94 Understanding Islamic Finance
it may not be harmful for the financial and payment systems. Abolition of interest will, to a
large extent, curtail the harmful features of the creation of credit by banks. They argue that
the crucial question with regard to causation of trade cycles is related to the role of interest
in such a credit system and not credit creation as such. Under an interest-based system, the
entrepreneur has to aim at a rate of profit which may be three times as high as the rate
of interest or even higher. This high pitching of profits forces him to either raise the price
of the product or lower the wages of labour. Whatever proportion is assigned to either of
the alternatives, effective demand is slashed. The remedy suggested by these economists
recommends reshaping the credit structure so that loans cease to command any interest and
profits get reduced to the level where they pay only for the labour of the enterprise.
Under a Shirkah-based, interest-free system, it should not be difficult to conclude that
possibilities for overexpansion will be sufficiently limited, especially as the liability to losses
will attach to the banking system – the creator of credit. The relationship of an Islamic bank
with its clients is that of a partner, investor or trader, and not of a creditor or debtor, as in a
conventional bank. Islam lays stress on equitable sharing of profit and loss between capital
and enterprise that should be by mutual consent. Working along these lines, the Islamic
commercial banks will be creating credit as their counterparts do in the present system.
Creation of credit by the banks depends on the public habit of keeping their income and
savings in the form of bank deposits and making the most of their payments through cheques.
This enables the bank to meet public demand for cash by keeping a fractional reserve against
their deposits. The overall volume of credit fluctuates as banks’ cash reserves change due
to changes in the public demand for cash or the central bank’s policies. 19
4.7.4 Currency Rate Fluctuation and Settlement of Debts
IFIs create debts/receivables by way of trade and leasing-based modes. What impact inflation
has on their receivables is an area of important discussion. Before deliberating upon the
Shar¯ı´ah position of linking the debts with any money or a commodity, it is pertinent to
observe that, even in conventional finance, indexation is not normally used to make up
the loss occurring due to inflation. Conventional institutions rather make a provision for a
floating rate in the agreements, keeping in mind the future inflationary pressures. As such,
any new rate is applied on the remaining period, while it does not affect the liability already
accrued.
Islamic banks are not allowed as a rule to link any debt or receivable for the purpose
of indexation. In certain modes/products, however, they are allowed to stipulate a floating
or variable rate. But this does not affect any debt liability already created. For example,
in Ijarah, Islamic banks can charge rental at a higher rate, if already provided for in the
agreement, for any remaining period of the lease; but the rentals for a particular period once
accrued cannot be indexed.
The issue of indexation will be deliberated upon in detail in Chapter 7. Here, we shall
give only a brief overview of the Shar ¯ı´ah position on indexation. The clear injunctions of
the Holy Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah reveal that if the financial contribution takes the form of a loan
or a debt, it is to be paid back exactly in the same kind and quantity, irrespective of any
change in the value of the concerned currency or price of the commodity lent or borrowed,
19 For further details on various aspects of money see Chapra, 1985, pp. 195–208; Al Jarhi, 1983; Choudhury, 1997, pp. 71–103,
286–291.


----- p.95 (pdf 123) -----


The Philosophy and Features of Islamic Finance 95
at the time of return of the loan. This principle is applicable not only for loans and debts
but also for credit, barter, deferred exchange of currency, delayed payment of remuneration
after devaluation or revaluation, indemnity and a change in the unit of currency at the time
of redemption of the loan.
However, if the currency of the debt becomes extinct or is not available for any reason,
its counter value will be paid to repay the debt and the rate will be that of the due date.
For example, a credit sale executed on 1st July generates a debt of ten Saudi Riyals (SR)
payable on 31st December. On the due date, i.e. 31st December, the purchaser is liable to
pay SR 10 irrespective of the Riyal’s value in terms of any other currency. If the debtor is
obliged to pay in Rupees for any reason, the exchange rate will be that which is prevailing
on 31st December because he was liable to pay Saudi Riyals on that date.
A change in the value of money, particularly a depreciation of currencies normally termed
inflation, is a general feature of most of present-day economies. The main cause of this
depreciation is the unlimited creation of money and credit, creating liabilities for debtors in
general and hitting future generations in particular.
Governments and central banks have used a variety of measures to combat inflation,
including indexation of wages and financial obligations used largely in Latin American
countries in the 1980s. But these measures could not control prices and inflation rose in a
number of countries to over 2000 % per annum. Ultimately, they had to revise the strategy
and adopt policies other than indexation for combating inflation.
In Islamic finance it is also sometimes argued that indexation should be adopted to counter
inflationary pressures or that repayments may be made after taking into account the impact of
inflation on the purchasing power of money. Experience has shown, however, that indexation
is neither a substitute for interest nor has it been able to control the vagaries of inflation. The
Nass (clear text) of the Holy Qur’ ¯an (2: 279) allows only the principal of a loan and debt
and declares any addition over it as Riba. In the presence of the Nass, the idea of linking
loans/debts to the purchasing power of money cannot be justified on the basis of Ijtihad,
because Ijtihad is carried out only where the guidance of the Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah does not
exist. This approach is further discussed below. 20
In the past, the value of bullion money was represented by its content. The value of
debased money or paper money is represented by official commitments rather than its
physical content. During an inflationary period, the intrinsic characteristics of money, i.e.
its role as a medium of exchange and as a unit of account, remain intact. Only the relative
characteristics change, i.e. the future value of money in terms of its exchange value; but this
has been changing since the introduction of money, even in respect of full-bodied coins.
The value of silver dirhams depreciated in terms of gold dinars in the time of the early
Caliphate.21 But we do not find any reference in the whole literature on Islamic economics
and finance to the concept of indexation in that era.
Shaikh Taqi Usmani, as Judge of the Shariat Appellate Bench, has also refuted the
argument that interest is paid to compensate the loss that a lender suffers due to inflation. 22 He
nullified the suggestion that indexation of loans can be a suitable substitute for interest-based
loans. In this respect he says:
20 For details, see Usmani, 1999, pp. 110–114.
21 See, Maududi, 1982 / 1991, 1, pp. 382, 383 (4: 92).
22 Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, pp. 593–596.


----- p.96 (pdf 124) -----


96 Understanding Islamic Finance
“But without going into the question whether indexation of loans is or is not in conformity with
Shar¯ı´ah, this suggestion is not practical so far as the banking transactions are concerned. The
reason is obvious. The concept of indexation of loans is to give the real value of the principal to the
financier based on the rate of inflation, and therefore, there is no difference between depositors and
borrowers in this respect. It means that the bank will receive from its borrowers the same rate as it
will have to pay to its depositors, both being based on the same measure, i.e. the rate of inflation.
Thus, nothing will be left for the banks themselves, and no bank can be run without a profit”.
The learned Justice has admitted the problems created by inflation and has also referred
to various suggestions given by different quarters for solving the problem. 23
With regard to the impact of change in the purchasing power of any currency on a debt,
the OIC Fiqh Council in its fifth session (10–15th December, 1988) resolved the following:
“It is significant that a fixed debt is repaid in its own currency and not by its counter value, because
debts are settled in the same currency. Thus, it is not permitted to attach fixed debts, whatever their
source, to currency fluctuation”.
4.8 SUMMARY
We have discussed the central ingredients of Islamic finance and some relevant aspects that
could be helpful in achieving Shar ¯ı´ah compliance for Islamic banks’ transactions. The term
“Islamic finance” or “Islamic banking” simply refers to a state of affairs wherein the financial
institutions and the clients have to fulfil the relevant principles of Islamic jurisprudence.
Some conditions have been put in place to ensure that contracts do not contain the elements
of Riba, Gharar and Qim ¯ar – the main prohibitions as discussed in Islamic law.
Some of the major characteristics of Islamic banking can be described as follows: Islamic
Shar¯ı´ah does not prohibit all gains on capital. It is only the increase stipulated or sought over
the principal of a loan or debt that is prohibited. Islamic principles simply require that the
performance of capital should also be considered while rewarding the capital. The prohibition
of a risk-free return and permission to trade, as enshrined in verse 2: 275 of the Holy Qur’ ¯an,
makes the financial activities in an Islamic set-up real asset-backed with the ability to cause
“value addition”.
Profit has been recognized as “reward” for (use of) capital and Islam permits gainful
deployment of surplus resources for enhancement of their value. However, along with the
entitlement to profit, the liability of risk of loss on capital rests with the capital itself; no
other factor/party can be made to bear the burden of the risk of loss. Therefore, financial
transactions, in order to be permissible, should be associated with goods, services or benefits.
While at a micro level this feature of Islamic finance leads to the generation of real economic
activity and stable growth, at a macro level it can be helpful in creating better discipline in
the conduct of fiscal and monetary policies.
The Islamic banking system is based on risk-sharing, owning and handling of physical
goods, involvement in the process of trading and leasing and construction contracts using
various Islamic modes of business and finance. As such, Islamic banks deal with asset
management for the purpose of income generation. They have to prudently handle the unique
risks involved in the management of assets by adherence to the best practices of corporate
23 Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, p. 593.


----- p.97 (pdf 125) -----


The Philosophy and Features of Islamic Finance 97
governance. Once the banks have a stable stream of Halal income, depositors will also
receive stable and Halal income.
Islamic banks reflect the movement towards eliminating the role of interest in human
society, in keeping with the teachings of Islam and other major religions. They mobilize
resources through Shar ¯ı´ah-compatible ways. The most important of these are demand and
investment deposits as well as shareholders’ equity. Demand deposits normally do not
participate in profit or loss to the banks and their repayment is guaranteed. In contrast
with this, investment deposits are mobilized on the basis of profit/loss sharing. This should
motivate the depositors to monitor the affairs of their banks more carefully and to punish
them by withdrawing their deposits if the banks’ performance is not up to their expectations.
Islamic banks are, therefore, under a constraint to manage their risks more effectively.
If the banks, with the money mobilized on the Shirkah principle, conduct business keeping
in mind the Shar¯ı´ah principles of trade and lease, their business will be Islamic and the return
earned and distributed among the savers/investors will be Halal. They have to avoid Riba –
earning returns from a loan contract or selling debt contracts at a discount or premium –
Gharar – absolute risk about the subject matter of the contracts or the price – gambling and
chance-based games and general prohibitions and unethical practices.
The rules pertaining to currency exchange contracts (hand to hand and in equal quantity
in case of homogeneous currency) have also been discussed. Violation of these rules will
result in Riba Al-Fadl (where the quantity of hand-to-hand exchanged money is different)
or Riba Al-Nasiah (where money is exchanged for money with deferment).
This chapter has also explained that money has the potential for growth when it joins
hands with entrepreneurship. Therefore, money has time value, but this can be manifested
in sale/leasing contracts only. Accordingly, a person can sell any commodity for one price
on a cash-and-carry basis and for a higher price on a deferred payment basis. However, this
is subject to certain conditions, the fulfilment of which is necessary to differentiate interest
from legitimate profit. What is prohibited is any addition to the price once mutually agreed
because of any delay in its payment. This is because the commodity once sold, even on
credit, belongs to the purchaser on a permanent basis and the seller has no right to re-price a
commodity that he has sold and which no longer belongs to him. It further transpires that time
valuation is possible only in business and trade of goods and not in exchange of monetary
values and loans or debts. Loaning is considered in Shar ¯ı´ah a virtuous act from which one
cannot take any benefit. The discussion in the chapter leads to an important conclusion that
valuation of the credit period based on the value of the goods or their usufruct is different
from the conventional concepts of “opportunity cost” or “time value”.
Islamic economics has the genuine provision of converting money into assets, on the
basis of which one can measure its utility. While it concedes the concept of time value
of money to the extent of pricing in credit sales, it does not uphold generating rent to the
capital as interest does in credits and advances, leading to a rentier class in society. Hence,
economic agents in an Islamic economy will have positive time preference and there will
be indicators available in the economy to approximate the rates of their time preferences,
generally determined by the forces of demand and supply. There is no justification to assume
a zero rate of time preference in real sector business in an Islamic economy.
Besides trading, Islam allows leasing of assets and getting rentals against the usufruct
taken by the lessee. All such things/assets, the corpuses of which are not consumed with
their use, can be leased out against fixed rentals. The ownership in leased assets remains
with the lessor, who assumes the risks and gets the rewards of his ownership.


----- p.98 (pdf 126) -----


98 Understanding Islamic Finance
Other salient features of Islamic finance are:
• Differentiating between trading (definite transfer of ownership of goods against payment
of price), loaning (temporary transfer of ownership of goods/assets free of any payment)
and leasing (transfer of usufruct of goods against payment of rent).
• All gains on principal are not prohibited and the deciding factor is the nature of the
transaction.
• Lending is a virtuous act – not a business.
• Islamic banking is a business; lending will not be its regular business. Rather, banks
will be facilitating production and trade just like any business ventures, charging profit
from the business community and giving ex post returns to savers/investors, getting
management fees/shares for their services.
• Entitlement to profit is linked with the liability of risk of loss that comes with the capital
itself. Profit is earned by sharing the risk and reward of ownership through the pricing of
goods, services or benefits.
The discussion in this chapter has aimed at removing the myths about Islamic banking.
Major findings in this regard are:
• A fixed return in the pricing of goods and their usufruct, subject to fulfilment of the
relevant Shar¯ı´ah essentials, is permissible.
• Islamic banking is also a business to be conducted by the funds mobilized primarily from
the middle class of the economy. This does not mean the availability of cost-free money.
Islamic banks earn through trade, lease and services and the income is distributed among
the suppliers of funds on the basis of defined principles.
• It is absolutely normal that in trade, the cash and credit prices of a commodity are
different, provided one price is settled before finalization of the contract and there is no
change in the liability thus created.
• While trade profit is permissible, any excess payment sought on loans or debts is prohibited
due to being Riba. The profit margin that banks charge in their trade operations is
permissible if the trading principles given by Islam are taken care of.
• It is true that the preferable modes for financing operations by banks are Shirkah-
based modes (Musharakah and Mudarabah). But trading and lease-based modes are also
permissible. Banks can use all of these modes, keeping in mind the risk profile of the
savers/investors and cash flow and profitability of the fund users.


----- p.99 (pdf 127) -----


Part II
Contractual Bases in Islamic Finance


----- p.100 (pdf 128) -----




