
----- p.101 (pdf 129) -----


5
Islamic Law of Contracts and Business
Transactions
5.1 INTRODUCTION
Islam considers the property of people as sacred and inviolable as their life and honour.
To ensure this, it forbids the unlawful devouring of others’ property by way of theft,
embezzlement, usurpation, bribery, cheating and all other unlawful means of acquiring
wealth. These proscriptions are in addition to the main prohibitions like Riba, Gharar and
Qim¯ar, which are considered major causes for usurpation of others’ property. In addition,
different transactions have different features that need to conform to the tenets of the Shar¯ı´ah.
Contracts that do not conform to these tenets or that involve any of the above prohibited
elements are regarded as invalid. As Islamic banks and financial institutions are dealing in
goods by entering into contracts like sale, leasing, partnership, suretyship, agency, assignment
of debt, mortgages, etc., it is worthwhile discussing in detail the overall framework of
the Islamic law of contracts to ascertain the permissibility/validity or nonvalidity of their
operations.
This chapter deals with the general principles of contracts, the elements of contracts, con-
ditions of subject matter, qualification of contracting parties, classification of contracts with
regard to validity, the nature of remuneration or compensation in contracts or consideration
of the contracts and the causes and effects of invalidity.
5.2 M ¯AL (WEALTH), USUFRUCT AND OWNERSHIP
Contracts deal with goods/wealth (M ¯al), usufruct of goods and transfer of ownership of the
goods/usufruct from one to another party. It is pertinent, therefore, to briefly describe all of
these concepts.
Wealth is anything that is useable and has legal and material value for the people. It means
that anything considered M ¯al from a juristic point of view should be of value, possessable
and it should have a legitimate use. It also includes abstract and intangible rights (like
trademarks and intellectual property). 1 In addition to other goods, fiduciary money is also a
kind of M ¯al. It serves as a medium of exchange or the standard by which the value of other
goods is measured but in itself it is not a subject matter of sale.
M¯al or property in Islamic commercial law is divided into movable and immovable,
fungible and nonfungible and finally determinate (‘Ain) and indeterminate (Dayn) categories.
‘Ain is a specific or determinate type of M ¯al while Dayn is a nonspecific or indeterminate
property. In contracts, when a person is to get a certain/specific property from other, this
1 Mustafa Zarqa, cf. Mansoori, 2005, p. 190.


----- p.102 (pdf 130) -----


102 Understanding Islamic Finance
is determinate or ‘Ain. When a nonspecific unit of any kind of property is to be taken,
it is regarded as Dayn. Hence, gold, silver, currency, grain, oil and the like are kinds of
indeterminate or Dayn property; while giving counter delivery in exchange contracts one
can give any units of these items. Legally, Dayn is the responsibility or obligation of a
person to another person that has to be fulfilled by paying any units of the relevant property
equivalent to the obligation. 2
With respect to the exchange of goods, Islamic law distinguishes between Mabi‘ (the
subject of sale) and Thaman (price). Currency notes and debt certificates are not a valid
subject of sale (in exchange of homogeneous currencies). They represent Thaman, serve as a
medium of exchange, but cannot adopt the role of a commodity, as their exact utility cannot
be assessed before they are actually spent. These are issued by the State or its authority and
people accept them with full confidence, as they accepted gold/silver in the past. Nobody
accepts the notes taking them as exchangeable for gold or silver. Further, the notes are
unlimited legal tender while gold (in the past) was limited currency. They are like “Fulus”
that had value more than their intrinsic value. 3 A commodity, on the other hand, is the
principal object of sale from which the benefit is ultimately to be derived in lieu of a price
as settled between the contracting parties.
Accordingly, ownership can be any of the following categories of assets and can be
acquired through contracts, succession or addition to the existing owned assets of someone:
1. Ownership of assets (Milk ul‘Ain).
2. Ownership of debt (Milk ud Dayn).
3. Ownership of usufruct (Milk ul Manf‘at).
If a person gets ownership of ‘Ain (the asset itself), he gets ownership of its Manf‘at also,
but not the other way round, meaning that getting usufruct of something does not mean
ownership of the asset itself, as in the case of Ijarah where usufruct is transferred to the
lessee and the ownership remains with the lessor. If an Ijarah contract involves transfer of
ownership as an automatic impact of lease, the contract is void.
Milk ul‘Ain is definite and not related to time, meaning that when someone gets ownership
of an asset through purchase, the asset is subject to his discretion; his ownership cannot be
ended or done away with, but can be transferred with his free will and according to any valid
contract as per the respective juristic rules. For example, a buyer of a commodity on credit
becomes the owner of that commodity and the seller, after execution of the sale, has no
jurisdiction to take it back from the purchaser; he can only ask for payment of the debt or the
credit price. As such, the concept of transfer of ownership of an asset, as distinguished from
the transfer of its usufruct, is of immense importance for Islamic banks, as it determines the
liability, right, risk and reward for them in their asset-based operations.
Milk ul Manf‘at is related to time, meaning that usufruct of any asset against rental can
be taken or given for a specified time. Thus, a valid Ijarah (lease) contract always needs
stipulation about the lease period.
An important categorization of goods is that of fungible (Zwatul Amth ¯al or Mithli) and
nonfungible (Zwatul Qiyam or Qimi) goods. An article is said to be Mithli if all of its
units are similar, like wheat or rice of particular varieties or vehicles of a given trademark.
People choose any of their units while the purchasing price of all units in the market is
2 For details, see Rahim, 1958, pp. 261, 325.
3 Usmani, 1994, pp. 26–28.


----- p.103 (pdf 131) -----


Islamic Law of Contracts and Business Transactions 103
the same. A commodity belongs to a dissimilar category if its like is not available in the
market and each of its units has a different value due to differences in quality or otherwise,
like paintings, gems and buildings. This categorization is important for Islamic financial
institutions because, for example, Salam can be conducted for Mithli goods, while Istisna‘a
is used for Qimi goods.
For transfer of the ownership of goods or their usufruct through trade, lease or gift,
jurists have laid down certain rules, keeping in mind the text of the Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah and
remaining within the general framework of the Shar ¯ı´ah for guidance of the people. While
ownership is transferred in a sale to the buyer, it remains with the lessor in Ijarah. While
“sale and buy-back” (Bai‘ al ‘Inah) is prohibited according to the majority of jurists, “sale
and lease-back” is allowed by almost all. These aspects are explained in detail in relevant
chapters.
5.2.1 Defining Various Related Terms
Various Arabic terms are used to denote transactions and contracts and convey the meaning
of undertaking a contractual obligation. These terms are: Mith ¯aq, ‘Ahd or W‘adah and ‘Aqd.
Mith¯aq
Mith¯aq means a covenant and refers to an earnest and firm determination on the part of
the concerned parties to fulfil the contractual obligations; it has more sanctity than ordinary
contracts. The word Mith ¯aq has been used in the Holy Qur’ ¯an in a number of places. 4
Examples of Mith ¯aq are the treaties in the early Islamic era between Muslims and other
nations and the contract of marriage. The Holy Qur’ ¯an refers to the covenant between God
and human beings (13: 20), treaty between nations or groups (8: 72 and 4: 90) and the
contract of marriage (4: 21). As such, this term has more relevance with religious and social
covenants than with economic or financial contracts.
‘Ahd or W‘adah
‘Ahd refers to a unilateral promise or an undertaking, although sometimes it also covers a
bilateral obligation. The Holy Qur’ ¯an has used this word in both senses. 5 The Qur’ ¯an says:
“And fulfil every ‘Ahd, for every ‘Ahd will be inquired into (on the Day of Judgement)”
or “(But righteous) are those who fulfil the contracts, which they have made”. ‘Ahd is also
termed W‘adah in the Fiqh literature.
‘Aqd (Contract)
‘Aqd, which lexically means conjunction or to tie, is synonymous with the word “contract”
of modern law. Murshid al-Hayran has defined it as the conjunction of an offer emanating
from one of the two contracting parties with the acceptance by the other in a manner that
it affects the subject matter of the contract. According to Majallah al-Ahkam al-Adliyyah,
an ‘Aqd takes place when two parties undertake obligations in respect of any matter. It is
4 See verses 4: 21; 4: 90; 8: 72; 13: 20.
5 See verses 2: 40; 2: 177; and 17: 40.


----- p.104 (pdf 132) -----


104 Understanding Islamic Finance
effected by the combination of an offer (Ijab) and acceptance (Qabul). Al ‘Inayah has defined
‘Aqd as a legal relationship created by the conjunction of two declarations, from which flow
legal consequences with regard to the subject matter. Among modern jurists, Abd al-Razzaq
al-Sanhuri defines ‘Aqd as the concurrence of two wills to create an obligation or to shift it
or to relinquish it. 6
An analysis of the above definitions would reveal that a contract involves: the existence
of two parties; the issuance of an outward act depicting internal willingness; an offer (Ijab)
and acceptance (Qabul). Further, there must be a legal union between the two declarations
regarding the subject matter or the contractual obligations. 7
‘Aqd, therefore, implies obligation arising out of a mutual agreement. The term ‘Aqd has
an underlying idea of conjunction, as it joins the intention as well as the declaration of two
parties. The Holy Qur’ ¯an has used the word in this sense: “O believers! fulfil your contracts
(‘Uqud).”8
‘Aqd is used in two senses: in the general sense, it is applied to every act which is
undertaken in earnestness and with firm determination, regardless of whether it emerges
from a unilateral intention such as Waqf, remission of debt, divorce, undertaking an oath,
or from a mutual agreement, such as a sale, lease, agency or mortgage. In this sense, ‘Aqd
is applicable to an obligation irrespective of the fact that the source of this obligation is
a unilateral declaration or agreement of the two declarations. In the specific sense, it is a
combination of an offer and acceptance, which gives rise to certain legal consequences. 9
Of the above three terms, Islamic law relating to business generally deals with
‘Ahd/W‘adah (promise) and ‘Aqd (contract). Islamic financial institutions presently enter
into promises in respect of a number of transactions, some of which are:
• Murabaha to Purchase Orderer, wherein the client places an order with the bank to
purchase for him a well defined asset and promises to buy the same at cost plus the
bank’s profit margin.
• Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek, in which the bank or the client promises with the other party
to sell or purchase the asset at the end of the lease period or transfer the ownership to
the client through the contract of Hibah (gift). Similarly, the concept of W‘adah is used
while issuing Sukuk on the basis of Ijarah.
• Sale and lease-back is allowed subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions and in this
transaction, promise is a crucial ingredient.
• Diminishing Musharakah, in which case the client promises to redeem the bank’s invest-
ment by periodically purchasing the bank’s share in the joint asset or the bank promises
to sell its part of ownership in the asset.
• Disposal of goods purchased through Salam, in which case an Islamic bank, after executing
a Salam contract for forward purchase of a well-defined product, gets a promise from
any trader that the latter will buy it on stipulated terms and conditions. Islamic banks also
take promises from their clients to sell the banks’ Salam assets when received as their
agents at any given price.
6 Mansoori, 2005, pp. 19–23.
7 Mansoori, 2005, pp. 20, 21.
8 (1: 5). Also see 2: 235; 5: 88.
9 For details see Mansoori, 2005, pp. 19–23.


----- p.105 (pdf 133) -----


Islamic Law of Contracts and Business Transactions 105
• Similarly, for disposal of assets manufactured/constructed under Istisna‘a, banks take
promises to buy from other parties.
‘Aqd (contract) is the most crucial tool for Islamic banks for both deposits and asset
sides. They enter into Am ¯anah, Qard (loan), Shirkah, or Wakalah contracts with savers or
depositors and Bai‘, Ijarah, Ujrah, Shirkah, Wakalah, Kafalah, Ju‘alah and Hawalah contracts
with those who avail themselves of the financing facility from them. It is, therefore, pertinent
to discuss in detail the concepts of W‘adah (promise) and ‘Aqd (contract).
5.3 GENERAL FRAMEWORK OF CONTRACTS
Islamic law is related to the methodology of the Shar ¯ı´ah in dealing with Ib ¯ad¯at (devotional
acts) and Mu‘ ¯amal¯at (transactions). Ib ¯ad¯at are held to be universal truths that are unaffected
by time and space. The Mu‘ ¯amal¯at are matters pertaining to individuals interacting among
themselves. They may change with changes in time and space. Imam Ibn Taymiyah explains
the difference between Ib ¯ad¯at and Mu‘ ¯amal¯at in the following words:
“The acts and deeds of individuals are of two types: Ib ¯ad¯at, whereby their religiousness is improved,
and Ad ¯at or Mu‘ ¯amal¯at (transactions), which they need in their worldly matters. An inductive
survey of the sources of the Shar ¯ı´ah establishes that devotional acts are sanctioned by express
injunctions of the Shar ¯ı´ah. Thus, what is not commanded cannot be made obligatory. As regards
transactions, the principle governing them would be permissibility and absence of prohibition. So
nothing can be prohibited unless it is proscribed by Allah (SWT) and His Prophet (pbuh) in the
overall framework.” 10
This provides a reasonable degree of liberty to the jurists in finding solutions to emerging
problems and issues in entering into contracts and transactions and business dealings with
one another.
Mu‘¯amal¯at, in turn, pertains to two types of activities, i.e. social and economic and/or
financial. This chapter deals with the second category of activities, relating one way or
another to transactions and human activities in respect of production, exchange and distri-
bution of economic resources.
Income is generated either through production of goods or providing services by way of
sale of goods, their usufruct or expertise. Businesses are conducted in various structures like
that of sole proprietorship, partnership (Shirkah), agency (Wakalah) or labour (Ujrah) or
forms like sale and lease. All such activities are subject to the observance of certain rules,
making the transactions valid and legally enforceable. These rules together constitute the
Islamic law of contracts.
A basic rule of Islamic law is that the factor to be considered in Mu‘ ¯amal¯at or social and
economic contracts is the apparent wording, any format or writing of the contract. Only that
will have legal consequences; any party who has entered into a contract cannot say that it
was not his intent (Niyyah). The law will enforce what he has agreed with the other party.
In devotional acts (Ib ¯ad¯at), on the other hand, it is the intent, meaning or Niyyah of the
person doing any devotional act that matters and not mere words.
The validity of the contract requires that its motivating and underlying cause should be
according to the requirements of the Shar ¯ı´ah. All contracts which promote immorality or
10 Ibn Taymiyah, Fatawa al Kubra, cf, Mansoori, 2005, pp. 3, 4.


----- p.106 (pdf 134) -----


106 Understanding Islamic Finance
are against public policy, are harmful to a person or property of a third party or which are
forbidden by law are deemed to be void. A sale or hiring of a weapon to a criminal who
will use it to kill innocent people is invalid, when the seller or the lessor is aware of his
intention.
5.4 ELEMENTS OF A CONTRACT
A contract comprises the following elements: the existence of two parties who must be
capable of entering into contracts, i.e. they must be mature and sane; an offer (Ijab) and
acceptance (Qabul); a legal (Sharie) basis of union between the two declarations and the
contractual obligations; and free from all prohibited factors. Muslim jurists in general hold
that, intrinsically, the essential elements of a contract are threefold and if these elements are
not found properly, the contract is invalid:
• the form, i.e. offer and acceptance (Sighah);
• the contracting parties (‘Aqidain);
• the subject matter (Ma‘qud ‘alayh).
According to Sanhuri, who has included some other factors, there are seven components
in a contract: 11
• the concurrence of offer and acceptance;
• the unity of the Majlis (session/meeting) of a contract;
• plurality of the contracting parties;
• sanity or the power of distinction of the contracting parties;
• subject matter susceptible to delivery;
• the object (Mahall) defined;
• the beneficial nature of the object, in that trade in it is permitted as per Shar ¯ı´ah rules.
5.4.1 Offer and Acceptance: Form of the Contract
The form (offer and acceptance) is the procedure or the means by which a contract is made.
Juristic rules require that the offer should be in clear language and unconditional. There
should be conformity of the offer and acceptance on the subject matter and the consideration
and issuance of the offer and its acceptance should be in the same session. We briefly discuss
these rules in the following paragraphs.
An offer (Ijab) is the necessary condition of a valid contract. It has been defined as a
declaration or a firm proposal made first with a view to creating an obligation, while the
subsequent declaration is termed acceptance (Qabul). Ijab signifies the willingness of a party
to do something positive. Islamic law is silent on whether the willingness of a party to
abstain from a thing also constitutes Ijab or not. The Council of Islamic Ideology in Pakistan
is of the view that only the commission of an act forms Ijab. Abstinence from an act cannot
be regarded as Ijab. Pakistan’s Federal Shariat Court is of the opinion that a contract may
be to do anything or to abstain from doing it. This definition conforms to the meaning of
11 Mansoori, 2005, p. 25.


----- p.107 (pdf 135) -----


Islamic Law of Contracts and Business Transactions 107
Ijab as given in the Contract Act of 1872 in English law, which says: “When one person
signifies to another his willingness to do or to abstain from doing anything with a view to
obtaining the assent of that other person to such an act or abstinence, he is said to make a
Proposal”.12
Offer and acceptance can be conveyed in a number of ways, namely: by words, by gesture
or indication or by conduct. There is no difference of opinion among jurists with regards
to the conclusion of contracts through words. They have not fixed particular words for the
formation of a particular contract. Whatever conveys the meaning with clarity is considered
sufficient for the formation of a contract. It is all the same whether the words are explicit or
implicit.
An offer is considered cancelled in the following cases:
• withdrawal of the offer by the maker;
• death of a party or loss of its capacity to enter into the contract;
• termination of the Majlis, i.e. contractual session, without concluding the contract;
• destruction of the subject matter;
• lapse of the time fixed for acceptance.
It is a requirement of Islamic law that acceptance should conform to the offer in all
its details and that it should be accepted in the same meeting if the offer is made to be
effective from that session. The requirement of unity of session for “offer and acceptance”
has been interpreted in different ways. This requirement is based on a saying of the holy
Prophet (pbuh): “The contracting parties have the right of option (to finalize or not) until
they separate.” 13 Despite some minor differences of opinion, jurists are of the view that a
contract must be completed by offer and acceptance in the same meeting until one party
acquires for itself the right to think over, to ratify or to revoke the contract later. 14 The
option of stipulation (Khiyar al- Shart) is a mechanism provided by Islamic law to overcome
the problem caused by the restriction of unity of the session. This option makes a contract
nonbinding for the party which has acquired that right for a specified period. 15
The Federal Shariat Court of Pakistan, in this regard, has observed:
“A narrow interpretation of Majlis would mean that the offer of the promisor should be accepted
without any delay and without giving the promisee any opportunity to think or consult someone
in order to make up his mind. This may be practicable in small transactions but will fail in bigger
transactions, which may require considerable inquiry. Thus, if an offer is made for sale of a
factory, it will require inquiry into the title, power to sell, value of machinery, value of building,
its liabilities, if any, profitability, etc. If the Majlis is interpreted to mean a single session, no one
will consider purchasing a property /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmi”
The Hadith (as given above) simply means that if the two parties agree to enter into
a contract in one meeting, each of them shall have a right to retract from it until they
separate. It also means that an offer must be taken seriously. To some modern scholars, the
word “meeting” is only a legal fiction, in that whatever time is taken by the promisee to
communicate his acceptance may be called a continuance of the same meeting. 16
12 Mansoori, 2005, p. 26.
13 Bukhari, Sahih, Kitab al Buyu.
14 Mansoori, 2005, p. 30.
15 The concept of Khiyar (the option to rescind a sale contract) is discussed in detail in Chapter 6.
16 For further detail see Mansoori, 2005, pp. 30, 31.


----- p.108 (pdf 136) -----


108 Understanding Islamic Finance
As such, if a seller makes an offer to a potential buyer: “I sell you this commodity for so
much”, but the buyer does not answer him before they separate, the sale is not concluded
and the offer no longer exists. However, if the buyer gets a specified time from the seller,
they can conclude the sale within that time on the basis of that offer.
It may be observed that the requirement of unity of session does not apply to the contracts
of agency, gift and appointment of an executor for the property of any minor.
5.4.2 Elements of the Subject Matter
The subject matter of a contract may include the object of the contracts, a commodity or
the performance of an act. The contractual obligation of one party according to Islamic law
is the consideration for the contractual obligation of the other party. Detailed conditions
in respect of subject matter in various types of contracts are different, but on the whole,
the subject matter should be existing/existable, valuable, usable, capable of ownership/title,
capable of delivery/possession, specified and quantified and the seller must have its title and
risk. If a nonexistent thing is sold, even with mutual consent, the sale is void according to
the Shar¯ı´ah.
Accordingly, short-selling has been prohibited by almost all scholars. Similarly, the subject
of a contract should not be a thing which is not normally used except for a nonpermissible
purpose. The subject matter of an exchange contract must have value of some kind. The
“usufruct” of an asset is considered property and thus can be the subject matter of an exchange
transaction. A commodity which has not yet come into existence or is not deliverable, and
the seller does not know as to when it could be delivered (like an animal which is missing
or a stolen car), cannot be sold in order to avoid Gharar.
On the same basis, a contract for sale of a debt or a receivable is not valid because the seller
of the debt (creditor) does not know whether and when the debtor will pay the debt. But,
if it is subjected to the rules of Hawalah (assignment of debt) with recourse to the original
debtor, it is valid. In Salam (the sale of goods with prepayment and deferred delivery), the
sale of a nonexistent commodity is allowed because all details about the commodity and
delivery are pre-agreed and Gharar is removed.
Conditions regarding the subject matter are discussed below in some detail:
• The basic attributes of the merchandise should consist of pure materials, which should be
objects of intrinsic/legal value having some use. The commodity, service or performance
must not include things prohibited by the Shar ¯ı´ah like wine, pork and intoxicants. It
must be ritually and legally clean and permissible. It is further required that the purpose
of the contract and the underlying cause should also not be contrary to the objectives of
the Shar ¯ı´ah. Therefore, a contract to operate a brothel or a gambling house is not valid
because in the former case the contract is contrary to the preservation of the family unit,
progeny and offspring, which is an objective of the Shar ¯ı´ah, and in the latter case, the
objective is opposed to the preservation of property and amounts to devouring others’
properties wrongfully. Further, since immortality is prohibited in Islam, any contract or
transaction that entails these evils or promotes them is also forbidden.
• Legality of the subject matter requires that the commodities should be owned by someone.
It also requires that it should be free from legal charge. Thus, an asset mortgaged with a
creditor cannot be sold until redemption of the asset upon payment of the debt.
• The subject matter should fulfil the objective of the contract. Thus, perishable goods like
vegetables cannot be the subject of a pledge. Similarly, public roads and parks cannot be


----- p.109 (pdf 137) -----


Islamic Law of Contracts and Business Transactions 109
the subject of a sale contract because these are meant for the benefit of the public and
not for individuals.
• The subject matter should not be harmful to the contracting parties or the public in
general. As such, producing and trading in intoxicants like heroin, etc. is not a valid
subject for contracts.
Precise Determination of Subject Matter
The subject matter should be precisely determined with regard to its essence, quality and
value. Determination can be made either by pointing or by detailed specification. In some
cases, jurists allow a sale even if the goods have not been examined. In such a case the buyer
is granted the option of sight after the contract. Thus, there can be two ways to determine
the subject matter:
1. The subject matter is known and specified when the parties to the contract see and
examine it at the time of the contract. If the subject matter is present in the session, the
majority view is that its examination is necessary.
2. Sale by description. If the asset or property to be sold is known, like a house of the
seller who has only one house, a description highlighting its specifications is deemed to
be sufficient. However, if the seller has a number of apartments almost similar to each
other, then identification of the specific unit is necessary for the contract to be valid. If an
owner of a shopping mall says to a person: “I sell one of the shops to you” and the person
accepts it, the contract is voidable unless the shop intended to be sold is specifically
identified or pointed out to the buyer.
The consideration of a contract or the price must be agreed and fixed at the time of
executing the exchange transactions. If the price is uncertain, the contract is void. For
example, if the seller says to the buyer: “Take this (asset) and I will charge you its price
in the market, or I shall tell you the price later”, or he says: “If you pay within a month
the price will be $100, and if within two months you will be charged $105”, and the buyer
agrees without stipulating any one final price, the transaction is not valid.
The measuring unit of the price should also be known, e.g. any legal tender or currency,
etc. Special care is needed in barter sales because in cases of uncertain price, sales would
not be valid. The ownership of the goods being sold remains with the seller until delivery
is made. In this respect, there should be a formal event that signifies the point at which
a contract is concluded, for example a handshake or a signature. At this point, ownership,
along with its risk and reward, is transferred to the buyer, who is liable to pay the price
either immediately or at a later specified date if the contract involves credit.
Possession and Certainty of Delivery of the Subject Matter
The capacity to deliver the subject matter of the contract at the time of the conclusion of the
contract is an essential condition of a valid contract. If such a capacity is lacking, the contract
is void. The holy Prophet (pbuh) is reported to have said: “He who buys foodstuff should
not sell it until he has taken possession of it”. It is reported that the Companion Hakim
ibn Hizam had bought some commodities in the times of Umar ibn al-Khattab (Gbpwth),
and intended to sell them to others. Umar ordered him not to sell the commodities before
taking their possession. Zayd ibn Thabit, Abdullah ibn Umar and Abdullah ibn ’Abbas


----- p.110 (pdf 138) -----


110 Understanding Islamic Finance
(Gbpwth) held the same view as that of ’Umar. Their interpretation implies that the vendor
must be the real owner of the goods and, as such, the owner of their risk and reward. As
regards the liability in case of damage, successors like Ta’aus and Qatadadh opined that if
the goods were damaged before being paid for (in a cash sale), they belonged to the vendor.
But if they were damaged after the purchaser had promised to take them, they belonged to
the latter and the former had to replace them. Further, according to Muhammad ibn Sirin, if
any party in the contract makes a precondition for the replacement of damaged goods, the
liability for such replacement is on the one who made it. 17
Therefore, the subject matter of the sale must be in the possession (Qabza) of the seller
at the time the sale is executed. In the case of Salam, certain conditions have been put in
place to rule out the possibility of nondelivery of the goods in a normal business scenario.
For example, only those commodities that are normally available in the market at the time
when delivery has to be made can become the subject of Salam, so that the Salam seller
can get them from the market for delivery to the Salam buyer if he himself is unable to
produce them as per the agreed specifications. In Istisna‘a, it becomes the responsibility of
the manufacturer/seller to supply the specified asset at the agreed time.
Possession of the subject matter by the seller means that it must be in the physical or
constructive possession of the seller when he sells it to another person. Constructive (Hukmi)
possession means a situation where the possessor has not taken the physical delivery of the
commodity, yet the commodity has come into his risk and control and all the rights and
liabilities of the commodity are passed on to him, including the risk of its destruction. In
the case of immovable assets, any legal notice of transfer or mutation is sufficient.
5.5 BROAD RULES FOR THE VALIDITY OF MU‘ ¯AMAL ¯AT
5.5.1 Free Mutual Consent
All transactions, in order to be valid and enforceable, must be based on free mutual consent
of the parties. The consent that is required for the formation of a valid contract is free
consent. Consent obtained through oppression, fraud and misperception renders a contract
invalid as per Islamic law. It also requires that consenting parties have certain and definite
knowledge of the subject matter of the contract and the rights and the obligations arising
from it. Accordingly, inspection of the subject matter and proper documentation of the
transaction, particularly if it involves credit, have been encouraged and emphasized.
Practices like Najash (false bidding to prices), Ghaban-e-Fahish (charging exorbitant prices
while giving the impression that the normal market price has been charged), Talaqqi-al-
Rukban (a city dweller taking advantage of the ignorance of a Bedouin by purchasing his
goods at a far lower price before the latter comes to the market) and concealing any material
defect in the goods or any value-related information in trust sales like Murabaha have been
strictly prohibited so that the parties can decide with free will and confidence.
5.5.2 Prohibition of Gharar
All valid contracts must be free from excessive uncertainty (Gharar) about the subject matter
or the consideration (price) given in exchange. This is particularly a requirement of all
17 Al-Sanani, 1972, 8, p. 28, cf. Hassan, 1993, p. 34.


----- p.111 (pdf 139) -----


Islamic Law of Contracts and Business Transactions 111
compensatory or commutative contracts. In noncompensatory contracts, like gifts, some
uncertainty is affordable. Gharar conveys the meaning of uncertainty about the ultimate
outcome of the contract, which may lead to dispute and litigation. Examples of transactions
based on Gharar are the sale of fish in water, fruits of trees at the beginning of the season
when their quality cannot be established or the future sale of not fully defined or specified
products of a factory which is still under construction. 18
In order to avoid uncertainty, valid sales require that the commodity being traded must
exist at the time of sale; the seller should have acquired the ownership of that commodity
and it must be in the physical or constructive possession of the seller. Salam or Salaf and
Istisna‘a are the only two exceptions to this principle in Shar ¯ı´ah and exemption has been
granted by creating such conditions for their validity that Gharar is removed and there is
little chance of dispute or exploitation of any of the parties. These conditions relate to the
precise determination of quality, quantity, price and the time and place of delivery of the
Salam goods.
Another relevant example of avoiding uncertainty is that of the sale of debt, which, per
se, is not allowed even at the face value, because the subject matter or the amount of debt
is not there and if the debtor defaults in payment, the debt purchaser will lose. Therefore,
discounting of bills is not allowed as per Shar ¯ı´ah rules. However, subjecting it to the rules
of Hawalah (assignment of debt) will validate the transaction, because under the rules of
Hawalah, the purchaser of debt (if it is on the face value) will have recourse to the original
debtor and Gharar is removed.
Other examples of Gharar-based invalid transactions are short-selling of shares, the sale
of conventional derivatives and the insurance business. Futures sales of shares, in which
delivery of the shares is not given and taken and only a difference in price is adjusted, trading
in shares of provisionally listed companies or speculation in shares and Forex business, in
which only the difference is netted and delivery does not take place, are other examples of
Gharar-based transactions.
However, speculation per se, which means sale/purchase keeping in mind possible change
in prices in the future, is not prohibited. It is only such sales that may involve the sale of
nonexistent and not owned goods/shares and Maisir/Qim ¯ar that are prohibited. 19
5.5.3 Avoiding Riba
As discussed in detail in previous chapters, Riba is an increase that has no corresponding
consideration in an exchange of an asset for another asset. The increase without corresponding
consideration could be either in exchange or loan transactions. As Islamic banks and financial
institutions are involved in real sector trading activities as well as the creation of debt as a
result of credit transactions, they must give special consideration to avoiding Riba lest their
income might go to the Charity Account due to non-Shar ¯ı´ah compliance. In the conventional
sense, the cost of funds amounts to Riba and they have to make profit by way of pricing the
goods or usufruct of assets and not by lending.
18 Already discussed in detail in Chapter 3.
19 Usmani, 1999, pp. 74, 75, 89–91.


----- p.112 (pdf 140) -----


112 Understanding Islamic Finance
5.5.4 Avoiding Qim ¯ar and Maisir (Games of Chance)
Qim¯ar includes every form of gain or money, the acquisition of which depends purely on
luck and chance. Maisir means getting something too easily or getting a profit without
working for it. All contracts involving Qim ¯ar and Maisir are prohibited. Present-day lotteries
and prize schemes based purely on luck come under this prohibition. Dicing and wagering
are rightly held to be within the definition of gambling and Maisir. Therefore, Islamic banks
cannot launch any such schemes or products. 20
5.5.5 Prohibition of Two Mutually Contingent Contracts
Two mutually contingent and inconsistent contracts have been prohibited by the holy Prophet
(pbuh). This refers to
1. The sale of two articles in such a way that one who intends to purchase an article is
obliged to purchase the other also at any given price.
2. The sale of a single article for two prices when one of the prices is not finally stipulated
at the time of the execution of the sale.
3. Contingent sale.
4. Combining sale and lending in one contract.
In order to avoid this prohibition, jurists consider it preferable that a contract of sale must
relate to only one transaction, and different contracts should not be mixed in such a way that
the reward and liability of contracting parties involved in a transaction are not fully defined.
Therefore, rather than signing a single contract to cover more than one transaction, parties
should enter into separate transactions under separate contracts.
Islamic banks may come across a number of transactions in which there could be inter-
dependent agreements or stipulations that have to be avoided. The combination of some
contracts is permissible subject to certain conditions:
• Bai‘ (sale) and Ijarah (leasing) are two contracts of totally different impacts; while
ownership and risk are transferred to the buyer in Bai‘, neither ownership nor risk transfer
from the lessor to the lessee. It is necessary, therefore, that lease and sale are kept as
separate agreements. In Islamic banks’ Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek (lease culminating in
transfer of ownership to the lessee), the relationship between the parties throughout the
lease period remains that of the lessor and lessee and the bank remains liable for the risks
and expenses relating to ownership. Transferring ownership risk to the lessee during the
lease period would render the transaction void. However, one of the parties can undertake
a unilateral promise to sell, buy or gift the asset at the termination of the lease period.
This will not be binding on the other party.
• Shirkah and Ijarah can be combined, meaning that a partner can give his part of ownership
in an asset on lease to any co-partners. Jurists are unanimous about the permissibility
of leasing one’s undivided share in a property to any other partner. 21 However, sale of
ownership units to the client in Diminishing Musharakah will have to be kept totally
separate, requiring “offer and acceptance” for each unit.
20 Already discussed in detail in Chapter 3. Also see Saleh, 1986.
21 Usmani, 2000a, p. 86.


----- p.113 (pdf 141) -----


Islamic Law of Contracts and Business Transactions 113
• Musharakah and Mudarabah can also be combined. For example, banks manage deposi-
tors’ funds on the basis of Mudarabah; they can also deploy their funds in the business
with the condition that the ratio of profit for a sleeping partner cannot be more than the
ratio that their capital has in the total capital.
• Contracts of agency (Wakalah) and suretyship (Kafalah) can also be combined with sale
or lease contracts, with the condition that the rights and liabilities arising from various
contracts are taken as per their respective rules. As per present practice of Islamic banks,
Wakalah is an important component of Murabaha, Salam and Istisna‘a agreements.
• Islamic banks can structure products by combining different modes subject to the fulfil-
ment of their respective conditions. For example, they can combine Salam or Istisna‘a
with Murabaha for preshipment export financing. Diminishing Musharakah is also a com-
bination of Shirkah and Ijarah, added by an undertaking by one party to periodically
sell/purchase the ownership to/from another partner.
Similarly, the exchange of two liabilities is prohibited. Transactions between two parties
involve an exchange of any of the following types: corporeal property for corporeal property,
corporeal property for a corresponding liability or a liability for another liability. Each one
of these can be immediate for both parties or delayed for both or immediate for one party
and delayed for the other. In this way, Ibn Rushd has identified nine kinds of sales. 22 Out
of the above categories of exchange, an exchange involving delay from both sides is not
permitted as it amounts to the exchange of a debt for a debt, which is prohibited. That is
why full prepayment is necessary for valid contracts of Salam. Some further details on “two
deals in one transaction” are given in Chapter 6.
5.5.6 Conformity of Contracts with the Maqasid of Shar ¯ı´ah
The injunctions of the Shar ¯ı´ah are directed towards the realization of various objectives for
the welfare of mankind. The objectives of the Shar ¯ı´ah have been emphasized in a large
number of the texts of the Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah. Any contract or transaction that militates
against any of these objectives is invalid in Shar ¯ı´ah. It is quite obvious that the rights of
fellow beings have to be honoured in respect of all transactions. The rights of Allah (SWT)
in Shar ¯ı´ah also refer to everything that involves the benefit of the community at large. In
this sense, they correspond with public rights in modern law. Therefore, any contract should
not be against the benefits of the public at large. 23
5.5.7 Profits with Liability
This principle states that a person is entitled to profit only when he bears the risk of loss in
business. It operates in a number of contracts such as the contract of sale, hire or partnership.
Any excess over and above the principal sum paid to the creditor by the debtor is prohibited
because the creditor does not bear any business risk with regard to the amount lent. In sale
and lease agreements, parties have to bear risk as per the requirements of the respective
contracts.
22 Ibn Rushd, 1950, 2, p. 125.
23 Mansoori, 2005, pp. 11, 12.


----- p.114 (pdf 142) -----


114 Understanding Islamic Finance
5.5.8 Permissibility as a General Rule
Everything that is not prohibited is permissible. The principle of permissibility establishes
the fact that all agreements and conditions contained in them are permissible as long as they
do not contradict any explicit text of the Qur’ ¯an or Sunnah.
Individuals are not always in a position to conduct exchange transactions on a spot
payment basis. Many times, one of the two counter values to an exchange transaction is not
exchanged simultaneously, as happens in credit (Mu’ajjal) or forward (Salam) transactions.
The validity of these transactions requires certain rules. Such contracts are discussed in detail
in various other chapters.
5.6 W‘ADAH (PROMISE) AND RELATED MATTERS
In W‘adah or ‘Ahd, one party binds itself to do some action for the other. ’Ahd generally does
not create legal obligation but in certain cases it becomes legally binding and enforceable.
This is where the promisee has incurred some expenses or taken some liability as a result
of the promise. Contingent promises are also considered binding.
Keeping in mind the intricacies of present-day business, particularly when conducted by
Islamic banks, contemporary scholars have reached the consensus that W‘adah is enforceable
by law until and unless the promisor is not in a position to fulfil it on account of any force
majeure. If nonfulfilment is due to any wilful act of the promisor, he has to make good
the loss to the promisee. 24 For example, A promises to sell next month a house to B (a
bank) for $100 000, but subsequently he sells the house to C before the month elapses. A
would be liable to make up any actual loss incurred by the bank, since it might have made
arrangements to lease the house or to sell it or to use it for accommodation for its staff and
thus incurred costs.
Let’s say A asks bank B to purchase for him a motor car and promises to buy it from B
at $20 000. After B purchases it for the total cost of $18 000, A backs out; B sells it in the
market for $17 000. Now the net loss of $1000 will have to be borne by A, which the bank
can recover from his security or token money (Hamish Jiddiyah).
The rationale behind this consensus decision is that, in many cases, binding promises
become a genuine requirement, the fulfilment of which does not amount to violation of any
basic Shar¯ı´ah tenet. For example, importers need to hedge their foreign exchange needs, but
since forward contracts of gold, silver or any monetary units are not allowed as per Islamic
principles relating to Bai‘ al Sarf, they can do this through unilateral promise by any of the
parties. Thus, they can take foreign currency forward cover for genuine business activities
allowed by the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars on the basis of promise and simultaneous exchange of the
currencies at the agreed time.
Some scholars have criticized Islamic banks for treating the “promise to purchase” by the
client as binding. But as it does not involve violation of any major Shar ¯ı´ah principle, many
edicts have declared it binding, keeping in mind the practical problems in finalization of
contracts. Quoting the arguments of both sides, Dylan Ray concludes:
“Having examined these Fatwas, it seems clear that from the point of view of the medieval
Fiqh sources, the only correct view is that the promise to purchase ought not to be binding.
24 For details see Vogel and Hayes, 1998, pp. 125–128.


----- p.115 (pdf 143) -----


Islamic Law of Contracts and Business Transactions 115
However, modern Muslim jurists do not at all consider themselves bound by their predecessors,
and most Islamic banks consider the promise to purchase as binding. Further, they require collateral
against the possibility of the promise being dishonoured. This reasoned departure from medieval
Fiqh demonstrates that important developments are occurring in the way Islamic judgements are
constructed. These developments are creating a degree of conflict among Islamic legal scholars,
and objections have been raised against the Murabaha transaction as it is currently practised.”
In the opinion of this author, it does not involve any conflict. It seems that Ray has
not thoroughly read the position and importance of promise in Islamic Shar ¯ı´ah. Many
traditional jurists, particularly the Malikis, Hanbalis and some Hanafi and Shafi‘e, and almost
all contemporary jurists have accepted the legal effectiveness of promise if understanding
between the promisor and the promisee takes place in commercial dealings with mutual
consent. According to them, fulfilling a promise is mandatory and a promisor is under moral
as well as legal obligation to fulfil his promise. In this regard, Shaikh Taqi Usmani says:
“This view is ascribed to Samurah b. Jundub, the well-known companion of the holy Prophet
‘Umar B. Abdul Aziz, Hasan al-Basri, Sa‘id b. al-Ashwa’, Ishaq b. Rahwaih and Imam Bukhari.
The same is the view of some Maliki jurists, and it is preferred by Ibn-al-Arabi and Ibn-al-Shat,
and endorsed by al-Ghazzali, the famous Shafi‘e jurist, who says the promise is binding if it is
made in absolute terms. The same is the view of Ibn Shubruma”. 25 The third view is presented by
some Maliki jurists. They say that in normal conditions, promise is not binding, but if the promisor
has caused the promise to incur some expenses or undertake some labour or liability on the basis
of promise, it is mandatory on him to fulfil his promise for which he may be compelled by the
courts.26
Further, this does not contradict any Nass (text) of the Qur’ ¯an or Sunnah and therefore
can be accepted on the principle of Ib ¯ahatul Asliyah.
The Islamic Fiqh Academy of the OIC has made the promise in commercial dealings
binding with the following conditions:
1. The promise should be unilateral or one-sided.
2. The promisor must have caused the promisee to incur some liabilities or expenses.
3. If the promise is to purchase something, the actual sale must take place at the appointed
time by the exchange of offer and acceptance. Mere promise itself should not be taken
as the actual sale.
4. If the promisor backs out of his promise, the court may force him either to purchase
the commodity or pay actual damages to the seller. The actual damages will include the
actual monetary loss suffered by him, but will not include the opportunity cost. 27
According to the majority of scholars, Muwa‘adah or Mu‘ahidah (bilateral promise) is
not allowed in situations where ‘Aqd is not allowed (e.g. forward currency contracts), and
thus not enforceable by law. However, some scholars of the subcontinent consider bilateral
promise as enforceable by law except for the bilateral promises in transactions like short-
selling of currencies or shares of joint stock companies. Notwithstanding the binding nature
of promise, the difference between a contract (‘Aqd) and a bilateral promise is that the
ownership in bilateral promise is not transferred at the time of signing the promise, while in
25 Al Muhallah, 8: 28; Bukhari, al-Sahih, al Shahadat; Ghazali, 3: 133, cf. Usmani, 2000a, p. 122.
26 For detail see Usmani, 2000a, pp. 120–126.
27 OIC Fiqh Academy, 5th Conference, Resolution Nos. 2 and 3.


----- p.116 (pdf 144) -----


116 Understanding Islamic Finance
‘Aqd, not only the ownership transfers but also the rules of inheritance apply as soon as it
is executed.
The binding nature of promise has important implications for Islamic banks’ operations
in respect of Murabaha to Purchase Orderer, Ijarah-wal-Iqtina‘, Diminishing Musharakah,
which is used by many Islamic banks in the world for housing finance, and for the disposal
of goods purchased by banks under Salam/Istisna‘a.
5.6.1 Token Money (Hamish Jiddiyah) and ‘Arb ¯un
In the case of binding promises, Islamic banks take token money from the promisee clients,
which is the amount taken from them to convey seriousness in purchasing the relevant
commodity/asset. In Arabic, this is called Hamish Jiddiyah – the margin reflecting the firm
intention of the promisee. Banks hold token money as a trust and adjust it in price at the time
of the execution of the sale. This means that Hamish Jiddiyah is taken before the execution
of an agreement, as against ‘Arb ¯un, which is taken from the buyer as part of the price after
execution of the sale agreement. In cases where the bank undertakes some activities and
incurs expenses in purchasing the asset for onward sale to the promisee, and the latter fails
to honour the “promise to purchase”, the bank can recover the actual loss from the promisee;
the excess/remaining amount of Hamish Jiddiyah will have to be given back to the client.
The actual loss does not cover the loss in respect of “cost of funds”. 28 ‘Arb¯un is the earnest
money given at the time of execution of the sale as part of the price.
Such amounts are also taken in tenders, in which the bidders show their intention to
purchase an asset at a certain price and instantly give a part of it to the seller who has called
the bid. If the bid is accepted, the amount becomes part of the price. So the amount is treated
as a trust until the time of bidding and the nonsuccessful bidders have the right to get it
back. Bidders can cover actual damage sustained in the bidding process. 29
The seller, after execution of the sale against a part payment, has the right to retain the
whole amount of ‘Arb ¯un if the other party has failed to perform within the period stipulated
in the agreement. The AAOIFI, however, considers it preferable to refund the amount over
and above the loss actually sustained by the seller. 30
In recent years, ‘Arb ¯un has become a subject of intensive research in respect of finding
any alternative to the conventional options. It therefore warrants some detail. Imam Malik
has defined ‘Arb ¯un in the following words: “It is when a person buys a slave or rents an
animal and says to the seller or the owner of the animal, ‘I will give you one dinar or one
dirham or more or less and if I ratify the sale or the rent contract, the amount I gave will
be part of the total price. And if I cancel the deal, then what I gave will be for you without
any exchange’.” 31 He considers this deal invalid.
Two traditions are reported with regard to ‘Arb ¯un in various books of Hadith, one
prohibiting and the other allowing ‘Arb ¯un sale. But both of these are considered weak and
unauthenticated. Among the main schools of Islamic Fiqh, only the Hanbali school considers
Bai‘ al ‘Arb ¯un a legal contract. They rely mainly on the report from Naf‘i Ibnal Harith,
28 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, No. 5, p. 66.
29 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, pp. 65, 66, 76.
30 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, pp. 65, 66, 76.
31 Al-Baji, 1332AH, 4, p. 158.


----- p.117 (pdf 145) -----


Islamic Law of Contracts and Business Transactions 117
an officer at Makkah deputed by Caliph Umar (Gbpwh), which states that he bought from
Safwan Ibn Umayyah a prison house for Caliph Umar (Gbpwh) for four thousand dirhams
on condition that if the Caliph approved of it, the deal would be final, otherwise Safwan
would be given four hundred dirhams. 32
The majority of contemporary jurists are of the view that if a buyer in actual sale
transactions stipulates by his free will and without any duress that he will either finalize the
deal within so many days or the sale will be considered cancelled and the seller will get
the amount given in advance, it could be considered legal. But open options, even in valid
sales, wherein the parties have no intention to buy and want profit simply by transferring
risk to the other party, are against the basic philosophy of Islamic finance. That is why
conventional options have not been accepted as genuine instruments in Islamic finance. We
shall discuss this in detail in Chapter 8. Here, we can briefly say that the concept of ‘Arb ¯un
is acceptable to the extent of part payment after finalization of the deal. Its legality as a
separate sale, i.e. Bai‘ al ‘Arb ¯un, and its implications for the legality of conventional options
are not acceptable, in general, to scholars.
5.7 TYPES OF CONTRACTS
Contracts can be classified with respect to a number of perspectives. With respect to validity
or otherwise as per Shar ¯ı´ah rules, jurists in general divide contracts into two types, namely:
valid (Sahih) and invalid (Batil) contracts. A valid contract is one that satisfies all of its
conditions, while an invalid contract is one in which one or more conditions for legality are
violated.33
Hanafis, however, divide contracts into three categories of valid (Sahih), voidable/defective
(F¯asid) and void (Batil). Thus, they divide the void contracts into defective/irregular (F ¯asid)
and invalid categories. 34 If one studies the details of these categories in books by the Hanafi
jurists, one may face some confusion regarding this categorization unless deep understanding
is developed by thorough and extensive study. That is why Zuhayli, while discussing voidable
contracts according to Hanafis, says:
“I have distinguished between examples of invalid and defective sales to avoid confusion, in
contrast to what most books of Hanafi jurisprudence discuss under the heading of defective sales.
The majority of such books use the term ‘defective sales’ to mean the more general category of
‘defective and invalid sales’, i.e. all sales that are legally prohibited. It is also common for the
authors of such books to use the term ‘defective’ (F ¯asid), when they really mean ‘invalid’ (Batil).
The reader is then forced to infer their meaning from the surrounding text or by telling statements
such as their saying: ‘thus the contract does not become valid’ in the case of invalid sales, and
‘thus the contract returns to being valid’ in the case of defective ones.”
In the following pages, we will be discussing the three categories as described by Hanafis
because these provide more options for practitioners to apply the Islamic law of contracts in
modern-day operations.
32 Ibnul Qayyim, 1955, 3.
33 Zuhayli, 2003, 1,p .7 4 .
34 For details see Zuhayli, 2003, pp. 71, 72.


----- p.118 (pdf 146) -----


118 Understanding Islamic Finance
5.7.1 Valid Contracts
The validity of any contract depends on the legality or illegality of the subject matter, the
existence and precise determination of the subject matter, delivery or the ability to deliver
the subject matter without involvement of excessive uncertainty and precise determination
of the price or consideration in a contract.
A valid contract is one which is in accordance with Islamic law, both as regards its ’Asl
(fundamental components, nature or essence) and Wasf (accessory circumstances or external
attributes). A contract is deemed valid when all elements of the contract (form or offer
and acceptance, the subject matter and the contracting parties) are found to be in order; the
conditions of each element have been met and it is free from external prohibited activities
like Riba, Gharar, etc. The form of the contract requires conformity between offer and
acceptance, their issuance in the same session and the existence of Ijab until the issuance
of Qabul. It also requires that parties to the contract must be sane and mature in age and
that the subject matter must be permissible, in existence, deliverable and known. (Petty
purchases of edibles by children that do not create any rights or liabilities for any of the
parties are exempt; however, the seller has to ensure that the children do not get involved in
harmful things. Similarly, day-to-day transactions in which offer and acceptance is implied
are exempt.)
A valid contract assigns all its effects which the Shar ¯ı´ah has determined for it. It becomes
effective (Nafiz) upon execution if not suspended (Mawquf), in which case it is enforced
upon the removal of the cause of suspension. Some jurists, including Hanafis, Malikis and
some Hanbalis, are of the view that the effectiveness of a valid contract can be delayed until
the happening of a future event. To them, a valid contract can be either Nafiz (immediately
effective) or Mawquf (suspended or tied to any future event). According to Shawafi‘e and
some of the Hanbalis, however, a valid contract must be effective immediately upon its
execution. A Nafiz contract is one in which the elements are found to be in order, the
conditions are met, the external attributes are legal and it is not suspended or dependent
upon ratification.
Contracts Effective Instantly or from a Future Date
Jurists allow the contracts of Ijarah and Istisna‘a (manufacturing upon order) to become
effective from a future date because a person does not own usufructs immediately as he
does in the case of a sale contract, but he owns them gradually, so time is considered in
such contracts. Kafalah (suretyship) and Hawalah (assignment of debt) are also considered
to be contracts effective from a future date. A Kafil is not required to pay debt immediately
when the contract is concluded. So it is valid if the surety were to say to the creditor: “If
your debtor has not paid off his debt to you by the beginning of next month, I will make the
payment”. Similarly, agency, divorce and Waqf are valid from a future date. A contract of
bequest, by its nature, also admits delay, as it cannot be enforced in the life of the legator.
The contract of Ijarah can be either immediately enforceable or made effective from any
future date.
The contract of sale is immediately enforceable in the opinion of all jurists, thus it is not
permissible to say: “I sell you this house at the beginning of next year”. The jurists see in
this postponement and delay an element of Gharar. It is like a contract which is contingent
upon an uncertain event, where the parties do not know whether it will occur or not. In
this regard, Siddiq al Dharir observes: “Indeed the only Gharar in a future contract lies in


----- p.119 (pdf 147) -----


Islamic Law of Contracts and Business Transactions 119
the possible lapse of interest of either party, which may affect his consent when the time
set therein comes. If someone buys something by ‘Aqd Mudhaf (effective from future) and
his circumstances change or the market changes bringing its price down at the time set for
fulfilment of contract, he will undoubtedly be averse to its fulfilment and will regret entering
into it. Indeed the object may itself change and the two parties may dispute over it”. It is
pertinent to note that Ibn al-Qayyim and Ibn Taymiyah do not subscribe to the majority
viewpoint. They maintain that ‘Aqd Mudhaf is permissible, without distinction between a
sale contract and a leasing contract. 35
To avoid any juristic issue, contemporary scholars suggest arranging a unilateral promise
for regular contracts in the future.
Mawquf (Suspended) Contracts
The following may be causes for suspending the effects of a valid contract:
1. Defective capacity of any of the parties, e.g. a transaction by a minor which has the
likelihood of both benefit and harm is valid subject to ratification, which may be accorded
by the guardian after the transaction and before the minor attains puberty, or by the
minor himself after puberty if the guardian did not object before his attaining puberty.
The status of such a contract is that if ratification is granted, it acts retrospectively from
the date of the contract, but if ratification is refused, the contract becomes void.
2. Lack of proper authority, i.e. the person acting as agent does not have proper authority
over the principal – the contract by a Fuduli (a person who is neither guardian nor agent,
or if he is an agent, he transgresses the limits prescribed by the principal). It is also
subject to ratification as in case 1 above.
3. The right of any third party. If the owner sells a property mortgaged by someone, it will
be subject to ratification by the mortgagee. If a house owned by A is mortgaged with
a bank, A cannot sell it, and if he enters into a contract to sell it, it will be a Mawquf
contract. The bank would demand that his debt be paid first. It is important to observe that
before ratification, the buyer has the right to revoke the contract but the mortgagor/seller
has no right to revoke the contract of sale made by him.
Binding (L ¯azim) and nonbinding Contracts
Contracts which are Sahih and Nafiz can be divided into L ¯azim (binding) and Ghair L ¯azim
(nonbinding) contracts. A L ¯azim contract is one in which none of the parties has the unilateral
right to revoke (without the consent of the other) unless an option (Khiyar-al-Shart) has
been granted to a party by virtue of which the right to revoke can be exercised. A contract
is Ghair L ¯azim if any of the parties has a right to revoke it without the consent of the other.
There are two reasons why a contract might be nonbinding or revocable:
1. The nature of the contract. Some contracts are nonbinding by nature; both parties are
allowed to revoke independently. Examples of such contracts are Wakalah (agency),
Kafalah (suretyship), Shirkah (partnership), Wadi‘ah (deposits or Am ¯anah), and ‘ ¯Ariyah
(commodity given for use without any compensation or rent). These contracts are ter-
minable by any of the parties. But if the parties mutually agree that none of them will
35 For further details, see Mansoori, 2005, pp. 181–185.


----- p.120 (pdf 148) -----


120 Understanding Islamic Finance
terminate up to a specified period, the contract will no longer be revocable unilaterally.
Accordingly, in Islamic banks’ investment deposits based on the Shirkah principle, the
banks can restrict the depositors to withdrawal before the settled date by putting a clause
to this effect in the agreement, i.e. the account opening form. Shareholders of joint stock
companies also cannot terminate their shareholding. They can simply transfer their part
through the sale of shares in the market.
2. An option (Khiyar-al-Shart) stipulated in the contract prevents it from becoming L ¯azim
until the time of Khiyar is over. The party possessing the Khiyar of recession can revoke
the contract within the period of the option without the consent of the other party. 36
5.7.2 Voidable (F ¯asid) Contracts
A contract that is legal in its ’Asl, i.e. it has all the elements of a contract, but is not legal
in its Wasf, i.e. with respect to external or nonessential attributes of the contract, will not
necessarily be void, rather it will be voidable or F ¯asid, and can be regularized or validated
by removing the cause of irregularity.
If a contract is structured in a way that is prohibited, it can, under certain circumstances,
be rectified by removal of the objectionable clause, or it may result in the entire contract
being annulled. If conditions of less importance, like minute specifications of subject matter,
are not fulfilled, the contract will be capable of ratification, but will be void due to defect
until the defect is removed or compliance with the Shar ¯ı´ah conditions is achieved. If the
defect is rectified, the contract becomes valid.
Causes of Irregularity in Voidable (F ¯asid) Contracts
Causes of invalidity are of two types:
1. Intrinsic causes which relate to the basic elements of the contract, such as unlawfulness
or nonexistence of the subject matter, or the absence of contractual capacity in any of the
parties.
2. Extrinsic causes that relate to Wasf, i.e. external attributes such as Riba or Gharar
contained in the contract.
It is pertinent to note that Riba and Gharar are causes of irregularity of a contract in
Hanafi law, while in other schools they are causes of invalidity of a contract. However, even
in Hanafi law, a Riba- or Gharar-based contract is not enforceable and only removal of the
term involving Riba or Gharar would validate it. For some detail, the following may be the
major factors rendering contracts irregular or voidable:
• Defective consent. The majority of jurists hold that a contract made under coercion is a
void or Batil contract. However, Hanafi jurists consider it a voidable or F ¯asid contract
which can be regularized by ratification. In other words, it is a suspended contract which
is subject to ratification. Ratification of an irregular contract is possible before possession
as well as after it.
36 Mansoori, 2005, p. 82.


----- p.121 (pdf 149) -----


Islamic Law of Contracts and Business Transactions 121
• Lack of any value-relevant information (Gharar or Jahl). If the contract lacks any such
information for any of the parties that may lead to dispute, the contract is F ¯asid. The lack
of information affecting the validity of contracts can be of the following types:
— Relating to the subject matter, e.g. indeterminate object in a sale contract or uniden-
tified/not sufficiently defined asset in an Ijarah contract. In Ijarah Mosufah bil
Zimmah,37 which is permissible, the asset might not be exactly identified but should
be sufficiently described as to leave no ambiguity regarding the use or usufruct to be
taken.
— Lack of information about consideration, e.g. one definite price is not settled or the
price is kept subject to change at the discretion of any or both of the parties.
— Lack of information about the time of performance in sale, lease and other binding
contracts. A partnership contract is not invalidated due to indeterminacy of the period,
because a partnership is a nonbinding contract in its origin.
— Lack of information about the guarantee, surety or the pledge. It is necessary that in
the case of a credit, the security, guarantee or the pledge must be identified and made
known to the creditor.
• Defect due to any invalid condition not being collateral to the contract or not admitted by
the commercial usage or which gives benefit to one of the parties at the cost of another.
Invalid and defective conditions may make a transaction voidable. 38 The following types
of conditions may be deemed to be invalid or not permissible:
— When it is against the purpose of the contract, such as stipulating that the buyer will
not sell the asset he is purchasing or he will not rent it out, or stipulating in a marriage
contract that the husband will not establish a matrimonial relationship with his wife.
— When it is expressly prohibited by the Shar ¯ı´ah, like selling an article on the condition
that the purchaser will sell something else to the buyer or lend him some money
or make him a gift. Such conditions are prohibited because Islamic law expressly
prohibits the combination of (i) two mutually inconsistent contracts and (ii) a loan
and a sale. A genuine credit sale of any commodity is one transaction and, therefore,
perfectly permissible in Islamic law.
— When it is against the commercial usage, such as a condition by the purchaser of corn
that the seller will grind it, or a condition by a buyer of a piece of cloth that the seller
will sew it.
— When it is advantageous to one party at the cost of the other party. For example,
where the seller reserves for himself an advantage from the sale, such as the condition
that he shall reside in the house sold for a period of two months after the sale, or he
will lend him some money. 39
It is pertinent to note here that these irregular conditions affect only compensatory con-
tracts, such as contracts of sale, hiring, etc., and do not affect gratuitous contracts, such as
37 In Ijarah Mosufah bil Zimmah, the lessor undertakes to provide a well-defined service or benefit without identifying any
particular units of asset rendering the related service. For example, an Islamic bank may require a transporter to pick up and drop
its officers from their houses to the office on air-conditioned vans of a defined nature. In this case, any particular van is not hired,
neither will the destruction of any van terminate the lease contract; the lessor has to arrange the vans as per the agreement.
38 There are three types of conditions according to Hanafis: valid, defective and invalid; see Zuhayli, 2003, 1, pp. 123–131.
39 Mansoori, 2005, pp. 157–163.


----- p.122 (pdf 150) -----


122 Understanding Islamic Finance
loan, gift, donation, Waqf, or contracts of suretyship, such as Kafalah, mortgage, Hawalah
(assignment of debt) or the contract of marriage. Irregular conditions in the latter contracts
do not invalidate them. Only the invalid condition is abrogated. The other part of the contract
remains valid and effective.
Joint ventures in early Islamic society traditionally took the form of Shirkah and
Mudarabah in trade and industry and Muzara‘a and Musaqat in agriculture. A valid Shirkah
entitled the parties to a share in the profits of business. If the contract of Shirkah or Mudarabah
failed to comply with legal requirements, it was treated as void (Batil) or voidable (F ¯asid)
depending upon the nature of violation. It was here that the jurists distinguished between the
functions of different factors and assigned to them different portions of income according
to the role that they had played in the process of production or in providing the service.
In such voidable contracts, the parties that help in production or assist the rendering of
service are allowed a matching wage, except the capital provider, who claims the residual.
As payment of wages and other charges supersedes the calculation of profit, the owner of
capital may be a loser if the earnings do not exceed this liability. In order to protect the
owner from this situation, jurists have introduced the concept of matching the rate of profit
(Ribh-al-mithl), matching rates in Mudarabah, etc. in addition to the concept of matching
wages.
Some Forms of Voidable Contracts
Hanafi jurists have identified some forms of F ¯asid or voidable contracts. These are:
• Bai‘ al-Majh ¯ul (lacking any material information). This refers to a sale in which the
object of sale or its price or the time of payment remains unknown and unspecified.
• Contingent contract. This is a contract that is contingent upon an uncertain event. For
example, A says to B: “I sell to you my house if X sells to me his house”.
• Sales contract effective from a future date. A sale becomes effective as soon as it is
executed. If a contract says that the sale will come into effect from a future date, it will
be voidable and will be of no effect.
• Bai‘ al-Gh ¯aib. This is a sale of an item which is not visible at the meeting of the parties;
the seller has title over the subject matter but it is not available for inspection of the
parties because it is elsewhere. This has to be regularized by seeing. However, if the
parties are satisfied with the description of the item of sale and there is no chance of
Gharar, the contract is valid.
• Sale contract with unlawful consideration. This refers to a sale whose consideration or
price is something prohibited by Islamic law, such as wine or pork.
• Two sales in one. This is where a single contract relates to two sales, such as selling one
commodity for two prices, one being cash and the other a credit price, thus making the
contract binding against one of the two prices without specifying either. 40
Legal Status of the F ¯asid (Voidable) Contract
A voidable contract must be revoked without the consent of either party. Therefore, no rights
or obligations arise. However, if the cause of defect or irregularity is removed, the contract
40 For detail see Zuhayli, 2003, 1, pp. 102–123.


----- p.123 (pdf 151) -----


Islamic Law of Contracts and Business Transactions 123
becomes valid. The legal position of such a contract depends upon whether the goods have
been delivered or not. For example, if the subject of sale, not previously identified, is
mutually identified, the sale contract is valid. If a lender has put the condition of interest in
a loan contract, the condition of charging interest is invalid and if this condition is removed,
the loan contract becomes valid and the debtor has to pay only the principal sum of the
loan. Here, the rule may be kept in mind that noncommutative contracts (like the contract
of loan) do not become void with a void condition. Only the condition has to be removed.
If the buyer in a voidable sale (due to unidentified subject matter, for example) takes
possession of an item or an object with the consent of the seller, ownership will pass on to
him and he will be liable to pay the value agreed with mutual consent or the market value
and not necessarily the price fixed in the earlier agreement. In this regard, Majallah points
out: “In Bai‘ F ¯asid, where the buyer has received the object with permission of the seller, he
becomes the owner.” 41 However, the parties can still revoke it if the buyer has not disposed
of it. In such a case, if the seller wishes to get the commodity back, he must first pay the
purchase money to the buyer. Until such recompense, the goods are held by the purchaser
as a pledge. But if the buyer has disposed of the property by onward sale or donation or
added or subtracted from it, or changed it in such a way that it can no longer be regarded
as the same object, then there is no right for either party to annul the contract. Thus, where
the buyer has sold the property, this second sale is valid and legally enforceable; it cannot
be obstructed in Islamic law by the fact that the first sale was irregular. 42
As such, a valid contract can be differentiated from a voidable contract in the following
manner:
• Ownership in a valid contract is transferred from the seller to the purchaser by mere
offer and acceptance, whereas in a voidable contract it is transferred to him by possession
taken with the consent of the seller.
• In a voidable sale, the value of the commodity, i.e. its market price, is admissible, whereas
in a valid contract, an agreed price is paid. In a voidable lease contract, the lessor is
entitled to equitable and proper rent (according to the market rate) and not to the rent
specified in the original lease agreement. Similarly, in a voidable partnership, each partner
gets the profit in proportion to his capital and not according to the agreement.
5.7.3 Void (Batil) Contracts
Contracts that do not fulfil the conditions relating to offer and acceptance, subject matter,
consideration and possession or delivery, or involve some illegal external attributes are
considered void (Batil). In other words, if major conditions relating to the form of the
contract (acceptance does not conform to the offer, or the offer does not exist at the time of
acceptance, etc.), parties to the contract (sane and mature), possession and deliverability of
the subject matter are not fulfilled, the contract is Batil. 43
The sale of a thing having an element of absolute uncertainty or speculation is not valid,
for example, the sale of milk in the udder of a cow is not a valid sale. Similarly, a sale
with unknown consideration and until an unknown period, the sale of a dirham for two
41 Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Majallah, Article 371.
42 Mansoori, 2005, pp. 87–89. Also see for detail Zuhayli, 2003, 1, pp. 139–144.
43 Mansoori, 2005, pp. 90–94.


----- p.124 (pdf 152) -----


124 Understanding Islamic Finance
dirhams, bidding over the bid (after the two parties have reached an agreement on the
price)44 and contracts actuated by fraud or deceit are examples of invalid contracts. In
contrast, permissible forms of Bai‘ include Salam (or Salaf), selling through bidding, Bai‘
al Khiyar (option to rescind), Musawamah (bargain on price), Murabaha (bargain on profit
margin), etc.
A Batil contract does not give rise to any effect, i.e. the buyer will not have the title to the
subject matter; the seller will not have the title to price or the consideration; ownership will
not transfer and the transaction will be null and void. If delivery of the goods has already
been made, the same would have to be returned to the other party regardless of whether
such illegality was known to the parties. If the buyer sells the goods to a third party after
taking delivery, the original seller cannot be prevented from claiming the goods. The reason
is that ownership cannot be transferred through a contract that is Batil. This Hukm is clearly
different from that of a F ¯asid contract, which has been discussed above.
5.8 COMMUTATIVE AND NONCOMMUTATIVE CONTRACTS
With respect to the consideration or counter value in exchange, contracts are of two types.
The first are Uqood-e-Mu‘awadha, or compensatory/commutative contracts, as a result of
which one party can get remuneration or compensation – like sale, purchase, lease and
Wakalah contracts. The other kind is that of Uqood Ghair Mu‘awadha or noncommutative
contracts, wherein one cannot get any return or compensation – like contracts of loan
(Qard), gift (Tabarru/Hibah), guarantee (Kafalah) and assignment of debt (Hawalah). Any
consideration in the contracts of loans, guarantee, against guarantee per se and assignment
of debt would be illegal.
5.8.1 Uqood-e-Mu‘awadha (Commutative Contracts)
Among commutative contracts (sale, hire and manufacturing), sale contracts can be further
classified as follows:
Classification according to object:
• Bai‘ Muqayadhah (barter sale);
• Bai‘ al H ¯al (simultaneous exchange of goods for money, spot sale);
• Bai‘ al Sarf (exchange of money or monetary units);
• Bai‘ Salam (sale with immediate payment and deferred delivery);
• Bai‘ Mu’ajjal (deferred payment sale, commonly known as a credit sale);
• Bai‘ Mutlaq (normal sale of goods for money, also called absolute sale).
Classification according to price:
• Bai‘ Tawliyah (resale at cost price);
• Bai‘ Murabaha (resale at cost price plus profit – bargaining on profit margin);
44 Imam Malik says regarding prohibition of bidding against each other and outbidding. “There is no harm, however, in more than
one person bidding against each other over goods put up for sale.” He said: “Were people to leave off haggling when the first
person started haggling, an unreal price might be taken and the disapproved would enter into the sale of the goods. This is still the
way of doing things among us.”


----- p.125 (pdf 153) -----


Islamic Law of Contracts and Business Transactions 125
• Bai‘ Wadhi‘ah (resale with loss); (The above three forms of sale are termed Buyu’al Amanat
or trust sales)
• Bai‘ Musawamah (sale without any reference to the original cost price-bargaining on price).
Ijarah or the contract of hiring is divided into:
• Ijarat al Ashkhas (rendering services);
• Ijarat al Ashya (letting things).
Istisna‘a (contract of manufacturing).
Wakalah can be both commutative and noncommutative contracts.
5.8.2 Uqood Ghair Mu‘awadha (Tabarru‘) or Gratuitous Contracts
The main feature of these contracts is the donation of property. The donor transfers ownership
of any property to a party without consideration. The following contracts fall under this
category:
• Hibah (gift);
• Wasiyyah (bequest);
• Waqf (endowment);
• Kafalah (guarantee);
• ‘ ¯Ariyah (loan of usable item free of any charge); 45
• Loan (Qard);
• Hawalah (assignment of debt).
Among these contracts, Kafalah, Qard and Hawalah are directly relevant to Islamic banking
operations, but they cannot charge any profit against these contracts per se . However, they
can charge fees for other services provided on the basis of Wakalah or Ju‘alah. For example,
while issuing L/Cs, guarantees, etc., banks can charge for their services depending upon
expenses incurred for issuing guarantees. These charges can be amount-based (possibly
slabs) but not time-based.
5.8.3 Legal Status of Commutative and Noncommutative Contracts
Compensatory/commutative contracts like sale, purchase, lease and other remunerative agree-
ments become void by inserting any void condition. Noncompensatory/voluntary agreements
do not become void because of a void condition. The void condition itself becomes inef-
fective. For example, a person enters into an interest-based loan; the condition of charging
interest on the loan would be void but the loan contract will remain effective, the debtor
will have to repay the loan/debt as it becomes due. Similarly, Gharar (uncertainty) does not
invalidate noncompensatory contracts; for example, jurists indicate that donation of a stray
or unidentified animal or fruit before its benefits are evident or a usurped commodity is
permissible, but their sale is not valid.
45 For example, the holy Prophet (pbuh) took iron chest plates on the basis of ‘ ¯Ariyah at the time of Ghazwa-e-Hunain; Mubarakpuri,
1996, p. 563 (Abu Daud, 1952, Kitab al Buyu’).


----- p.126 (pdf 154) -----


126 Understanding Islamic Finance
5.9 CONDITIONAL OR CONTINGENT CONTRACTS
As a general rule, conditional contracts are not valid. This, however, requires some detail
and some conditions could be acceptable. We find discussion in the Fiqh literature on three
types of stipulations/conditions:
1. T‘aliq – conditions which suspend a contract to any future event.
2. Idafa – an extension that delays the beginning of any contract until a future time.
3. Iqtiran (concomitance) that varies the terms of the contract. 46
In all these cases the contract may or may not be void even if the condition is void. Various
jurists differ with regard to the result of stipulation. Both Hanafis and Hanbalis allow some
delay in beginning contracts like lease of agency (where property is transferred only over
time) until any future event, but not for sale. 47
As regards concomitant conditions, all schools consider whether the condition agrees to
or is in conflict with the purpose of the contract. For example, a stipulation that the buyer
pays the price or the seller transfers full title is a valid stipulation. They also approve the
condition that the buyer will pay in certain coins/currency or provide a pledge as security.
However, they do not approve a condition that the buyer will never resell the object. The
conditions that pose problems are those by which any of the parties gets an additional benefit.
Here, jurists differ but Ibn Taymiyah has taken a practical approach by rejecting only those
conditions which are in contradiction with the Qur’ ¯an and Sunnah or the Ijma‘a, or which
contradict the very object of the contract.
As regards the overall view of different schools of thought, Hanbali jurists emphasize the
supremacy of the discretion of contracting parties and allow every condition and stipulation
as long as it does not contradict any text from the Qur’ ¯an or the Sunnah. The Hanafi, Sh ¯afi’¯i
and Maliki jurists divide conditions into valid, irregular and void.
Valid conditions are those that confirm the effects attributed to juridical acts by the
Shar¯ı´ah and which are admitted explicitly by it, such as the option of stipulation (Khiyar
al-Shart) reserved for a party to revoke or ratify a contract within specified days. Such a
condition is valid because the Shar ¯ı´ah has sanctioned the option of stipulation and the option
of inspection (Khiyar al-Ru’yah). The stipulation to sell on the condition that the seller will
not hand over the goods to the buyer unless he pays the price is also a valid condition,
because it stresses and confirms the effects of the contract and realizes its objective. 48
A condition in aid of a contract is valid, like a sale with a condition that the vendor
in the cash sale will have possession of the property when the price is paid, or a sale on
condition that the buyer should pledge something to the vendor as security for the price. 49
Similarly, any condition which is customary to embody in a contract will be upheld. 50 If a
F¯asid (invalid) condition is put into a contract that is otherwise valid, the condition will be
void while the contract will be valid and enforceable, i.e. without regard to that condition. 51
46 Sanhuri 3: 134–172; cf Vogel and Hayes, 1998, p. 100.
47 Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Majallah Articles 408–440; Ibn Qudama, 1367 AH, 6, pp. 6–7.
48 Mansoori, 2005, pp. 157–163.
49 Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Majallah Articles 186, 187.
50 Tirmidhi, 1988, No. 1276. (Jaber bought a camel from the holy Prophet and a condition of a ride to the home was put into the
contract). Also, Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Majallah, Article 188.
51 Nisai, n.d., 7, p. 300.


----- p.127 (pdf 155) -----


Islamic Law of Contracts and Business Transactions 127
A condition which is not of advantage to either party is regarded as superfluous and
cannot be enforced. A condition which is repugnant to a contract or transfer of ownership
but is of advantage to one of the parties will make the transaction debauched if made an
inseparable part of it. 52
A void condition is any condition which directly infringes any rule of the Shar ¯ı´ah, or
inflicts harm on one of the two contracting parties or derogates from completion of the
contract. We can therefore conclude our discussion on the subject of conditions in contracts
by stating that a condition or stipulation which is not against the main purpose of the contract
is a valid condition. Similarly, a condition which has become a normal practice in the market
is not void provided it is not against any explicit injunctions of the Holy Qur’ ¯an or Sunnah.
For example, a condition that the seller will provide five years’ guarantee and one year’s
free service is not void, neither is the availability of a warranty against defective goods a
problem. Similarly, conditions may be imposed in a sale regarding the service or repair of
any manufactured item sold to a buyer. The parties can give each other an option to cancel
a transaction during a given period after the conclusion of that transaction.
5.10 SUMMARY
All commercial transactions must be governed by the respective rules and norms of Islamic
ethics, as enunciated by the Shar ¯ı´ah. The Islamic system disapproves of any exploitation or
injustice on the part of any of the parties involved. To achieve this objective, the Shar ¯ı´ah
has advised some prohibitions and recommended some ethics. Detailed study of the rules
and norms reveals that Islamic finance is, in essence, an ethical system and ethics need to
be an inseparable part of the system.
What is not prohibited is permissible. Therefore, all contracts are valid unless they violate
the text of the Holy Qur’ ¯an or Sunnah of the holy Prophet (pbuh), or are in conflict with the
objectives of the Shar ¯ı´ah.
A property is either a specific existent object (‘Ayn), e.g. a house, or an object defined
generically or abstractly by an obligation (Dayn). One can subdivide sale according to the
types of Mabi‘ being exchanged. The mode of Murabaha can be used in trading of ‘Ayn
and merchandise and not in credit documents or Dayn.
The prohibition of sale of a debt for a debt affects when obligations (to perform or to
pay) are delayed, and when such obligations may be bought, sold or otherwise transferred.
In a transaction, any of the two counter values can be postponed, i.e. payment of the price,
or delivery of the commodity. While the former is a credit sale or Bai‘ Mu’ajjal, the latter
refers to a future sale wherein the goods sold are to be supplied later against prepaid price
(Salam).
Any contracts must be made as explicit as possible in order to avoid Gharar and injustice
to any of the parties. A clause in the contract allowing a change in liability beyond the control
of the liable party would be unjust, e.g. the client in Murabaha agrees that the bank can
change his liability whenever the latter likes, or the client agrees to automatic compensation
for the bank in case of his failure to meet the liability.
Commercial contracts have to be concluded at a price that is agreed mutually without
uncertainty or hazard (Gharar) with regard to the subject matter and the counter value or
52 Vogel and Hayes, 1998, p. 101; Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Majallah, Article 189.


----- p.128 (pdf 156) -----


128 Understanding Islamic Finance
consideration and the seller’s ability to deliver. A valid contract must comprise the following
intrinsic elements:
• The form, i.e. offer and acceptance, which can be conveyed by spoken words, in writing
or through indication and conduct. The acceptance should conform to the offer in all its
details.
• The contracting parties, who must have the capacity for execution.
• The subject matter, which must be lawful, in actual existence at the time of the contract
and should be capable of being delivered and precisely determined either by description
or by inspection/examination.
If the contract is one of sale, it must be noncontingent and effective immediately, because
the sale of goods attributable to the future is void in the opinion of the majority of scholars.
The arrangement of “two contracts into one contract” is not permissible in Shar ¯ı´ah;
therefore, we cannot have the agreement of hire and purchase in one contract, we can only
undertake/promise to purchase the leased asset.
Promise in commercial transactions can be binding or nonbinding. It can be legally
enforceable, particularly if the promisee incurs some expenses or liability as required by the
promise. Therefore, if the promisor backs out from fulfilling the promise, the other party
can claim for the actual loss that could arise due to nonfulfilment of the promise.
The validity of the contract requires that its motivating and underlying cause should be
according to the requirements of the Shar ¯ı´ah. All contracts that promote immorality or are
against public welfare, are harmful to a person or property of a third party or which are
forbidden by law are deemed to be void.
Generally, Islam prohibits all transactions that depend just on chance and speculation,
those in which the rights of the contracting parties are not clearly defined and those that
enable some to amass wealth at the expense of others and which could result in litigation.
Such transactions involve appropriation of other’s wealth without right or justice. Practices
like Riba, Gharar, fraud, dishonesty, false assertions and breach of contracts and promises
also lead to injustice. In every instance of prohibited business conduct one can discern an
element of injustice, either to one of the contracting parties or to the general public. In some
such cases, the injustice may not be apparent, yet it is always there. In order to nip evil in
the bud, Islam seeks to block all those channels that eventually lead to injustice. 53
53 For further details on Islamic law see: Hassan, 1993; Qadri, 1963, pp. 97–113.

