
----- p.129 (pdf 157) -----


6
Trading in Islamic Commercial Law
6.1 INTRODUCTION
The growth in wealth is an acknowledged pursuit approved by the Shar ¯ı´ah and both society
and individuals are encouraged to increase their wealth. This growth or development takes
place through the production of goods and exchange of values among parties in the market.
Further, Islamic law does not limit profits or fix prices; it promotes the free flow of goods in
an open environment for achieving such goals. All that Islamic law requires human beings to
do for establishing a just economic system is to avoid Riba and Gharar along with fulfilling
some other rules and principles of business to ensure that “the (wealth) may not make a circuit
between the wealthy among you”.1 While Riba is strongly prohibited in Islamic law, trading is
not only permitted, but also encouraged. Study of the Holy Qur’ ¯an and the Sunnah of the holy
Prophet (pbuh) reveals that Islam is favourably inclined to promote commercial and trading
activities.2
Islamic banks have to operate on the basis of profit and not Riba, and the profit can
be earned mainly through activities in three areas: trading, leasing and PLS contracts.
Accordingly, we have to distinguish profit from Riba and then find out the rules prescribed
by the Shar ¯ı´ah for earning legitimate profit. In this chapter we shall discuss various aspects
and general rules for Bai‘/trading that may be applied for trade-based modes like Bai‘
Murabaha, Mu‘ajjal, Salam, Istisna‘a, etc. Since banks’ funds invested through these modes
take the form of a debt, these can be regarded as debt-creating modes of financing and the
finance-user stands obliged to pay back the entire amount (or its equivalent, in cases of Bai‘
Salam), like a debt.
While both trading and Riba-based activities generate returns and increases in the cap-
ital, the increase generated by the former is welcome, whereas that generated by Riba
is forbidden. The Arabs engaged in trading and were used to a number of false/wrong
practices. The Shar ¯ı´ah condemned those practices and imposed various restrictions to
make the trade activities legal, just and decent. It is, therefore, an issue of paramount
importance that any increase/addition/growth to be termed “Riba” should be clearly dis-
tinguished from the increase in one’s wealth as a result of trading, and the rules of trad-
ing and tradable goods be identified to make trade transactions distinct from Riba-based
transactions.
1 Holy Qur’ ¯an, 59: 7.
2 Holy Qur’ ¯an, verses 4: 29, 10: 67, 14: 33, 16: 12, 17: 12, 28: 73, 45: 12, 61: 73–77, 62: 10, 78: 11, etc.


----- p.130 (pdf 158) -----


130 Understanding Islamic Finance
6.2 BAI‘ – EXCHANGE OF VALUES
Literally, Bai‘ means exchange of one thing with another; one thing being the subject matter
(Mabi‘) and the other being price (Thaman). The Majallah, a code of Islamic commercial
law based on the Hanafi Fiqh, defines a sale as “the exchange of property for property”,
and in the language of the law, it signifies an exchange of property for property with mutual
consent of the parties, which is completed by declaration and acceptance. 3 Legally, Bai‘
refers to giving ownership of a commodity to another person in compensation of the other
commodity. The seller gives ownership of the commodity to the buyer on a permanent basis
in exchange for the price.
The word Bai‘ in its widest meaning stands for any bilateral contract. In that sense, a
simple word for Bai‘ would be “exchange”. This may involve all types of business and
any exchange. But all exchanges that lead to Riba are unanimously prohibited. This is why,
contracts for interest-based loans are excluded from the definition of valid Bai‘ according
to the jurists. 4 Similarly, exchanges based on Gharar or absolute uncertainties are void.
The literature of Hadith and Fiqh contains mention of many types of Bai‘ that have been
prohibited by the holy Prophet (pbuh). The common factor of all such prohibited types is
that they contained the elements of Riba, deception and/or Gharar. A sale, to become valid,
must be free from all false and prohibited practices. The main features of a valid sale are
shown later in Figure 6.2.
There is confusion among some people that conventional banking business is also a form
of Bai‘ and therefore permissible in Shar ¯ı´ah. During the hearing of the Review Petition in
the Riba case in Pakistan by the Supreme Court of Pakistan, the Counsel of the petitioners
argued: “The word Bai‘ used in verse 2: 275 (of the Holy Qur’ ¯an) includes sale, business,
trade, investment, bargaining, etc; therefore, the present-day banking business is covered
by the term Bai‘.” 5 No doubt the referred verse of the Holy Qur’ ¯an highlights the wider
meaning of Bai‘ – in broad terms it means business of a particular kind, means of making
a living/earnings, a job or occupation. But it also provides a general principle governing
permissibility: all exchanges are permitted except those involving Riba. We explain this in
the following paragraphs.
Different exchanges involve different rules in respect of the liabilities and benefits for
the parties to exchange, ownership rights, etc. Exchange in the form of trading involves the
reciprocal exchange of property rights along with usufruct. In Ijarah, which is termed the
sale of usufruct, the lessor gives usufruct against rental but retains ownership along with
the liabilities relating to ownership. In loans, there is a temporary but complete transfer
of ownership (along with usufruct) to the borrower, who can use the loaned item like his
other possessions, but he has to give it back. Shirkah involves sharing of ownership and
benefit/loss among the partners. 6
In trade, as soon as a sale agreement takes place, ownership of the subject matter is
transferred to the buyer, irrespective of whether he has made a cash payment or has to pay
in the future according to an agreed schedule. In the latter case, the buyer is liable to pay the
3 Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Majallah, Article 105.
4 For details see Al Jaziri, 1973, 2, pp. 290–300.
5 Ayub, 2002, pp. 230–232.
6 Ibn Hazm (1988), while differentiating Bai‘ and Ijarah, says that Bai‘ makes the purchaser owner (of al ‘Ain); Ijarah does not
make him the owner. Ijarah of those things that are consumed with use is not valid, 7, p. 4, No. 1287.


----- p.131 (pdf 159) -----


Trading in Islamic Commercial Law 131
agreed price and not the commodity. In a loan, the item/commodity of loan is transferred to
the borrower and he gets ownership of the item with full discretion about its use. But he has
to repay a similar item/commodity or the money.
While Riba-based loaning involves the definite right of return, Bai‘ yields risk-based
return. In other words, “risk and reward” is an essential ingredient of trade, which is inherent
in all trading activities. A transaction becomes usurious if it involves an exchange of two
counter values such that ownership in the item exchanged is passed on to the other party
who has to repay it with any excess; e.g. if A gives $1000 to B for his use and B uses it for
consumption or in his business and then returns $1000 to A, it will be a loan transaction; it
will become usurious if A is required to pay any extra amount, $1050 for example.
Accordingly, rules are specific to every exchange (these have been explained in Chapter 4).
A trade transaction requires the transfer of complete and instant ownership that is irreversible
once finalized. It means that the seller excludes the commodity from his ownership and
gives it to the buyer on a permanent basis, while in loans, ownership is transferred for a
specified period and exactly its similar has to be paid back. 7
When the genera of the goods to be exchanged in trading are different, delivery of one
of the exchanged items can be delayed, as in a credit sale or as in advance payment for
purchase of wheat through Salam. If gold or any currency is exchanged for wheat or any
other commodity, there is no Riba; if wheat is exchanged for barley, Riba is found if delivery
of one is delayed, because they are species of the same genus. 8
Loan transactions, on the other hand, have to be executed on an equal basis for the
purpose of repayment. All banking transactions are covered under this rule and their unequal
exchange is tantamount to Riba. Therefore, as conventional banks deal in money, their
transactions cannot be termed as Bai‘ in the strict sense.
In this respect, renowned Hanafi jurist Sarakhsi says: “Trade is of two kinds: permitted
(Halal), which is called Bai‘ in the law; and prohibited (Haram), which is called Riba. Both
are types of trade. Allah Almighty informs us, through the denial of the disbelievers, about
the rational difference between exchange (Bai‘) and Riba, and says: ‘That is because they
said Bai‘ is like Riba’. Almighty, then, distinguishes between prohibition and permission
by saying: ‘And Allah has permitted sale and prohibited Riba’.” 9 Therefore, contemporary
Muslim scholars also do not include loaning in the meaning of the term Bai‘, particularly
because present-day money is fiat money and not bullion money that had intrinsic value and
that was traded in the past in addition to serving as a medium of exchange.
6.3 LEGALITY OF TRADING
Trade is one of the commendable professions among innumerable lawful sources of earnings
and Islam has put a tremendous emphasis on it for the acquisition of wealth. The Holy Qur’ ¯an
has permitted this in the words: “Allah hath allowed trading and prohibited Riba.” 10 This
aspect is further confounded by the fact that the Prophet (pbuh) himself, the Companions
and the eminent Imams and jurists conducted trading. The Holy Qur’ ¯an says: “O you who
7 Al Jaziri, 1973, 2, pp. 290, 291, 300–302.
8 Muslim, 1981, with annotation by Nawavi.
9 Al-Sarakhsi, n.d., 12, p. 108.
10 Holy Qur’ ¯an, 2: 275.


----- p.132 (pdf 160) -----


132 Understanding Islamic Finance
believe! Do not devour your property among yourselves falsely except that it be trading by
your mutual consent”. 11
The holy Prophet (pbuh) also gave it much importance by saying: “That one of you
takes his rope and then comes with a load of wood upon his back and sells, it is better
than to beg of men whether they give or reject him”. 12 While encouraging truthfulness in
trade, he observed that the truthful merchant (will be rewarded by being ranked) on the
Day of Resurrection together with the Prophets, the truthful ones, the martyrs and the pious
people.13 The holy Prophet also said: “The best earnings are those of the businessman who
does not tell a lie when he speaks; does not misappropriate the trust; does not break the
word if he promises; does not cavil while making purchases; does not boast while selling
his goods; does not prolong the period of repayment of loan; and does not cause difficulty
to his debtors!” Further: “The best type of earning is Bai‘ based on truth and earnings of
one by his own hands”.
6.3.1 Trade (Profit) versus Interest: Permissibility versus Prohibition
Inference can be made from the Holy Qur’ ¯an (verses 2: 275, 276) that Riba on loans and
debts must not be equated with trade or profit from sale. It is significant to note that the
mention of the permissibility of trading in the verse precedes the prohibition of Riba, which
fact signifies that the alternative to Riba is trading. Islamic banks’ trading activities are
sometimes criticized on two grounds: one, banks are intermediaries and as such they should
not get involved in trading and other real sector activities; two, their charging a price more
than the cash price in the market is equivalent to interest-based financing. 14 Both objections
are invalid because the business of banking and finance has never been static to any particular
structure and subject to proper risk management; an Islamic bank can adopt any modus
operandi of business keeping in mind the Shar ¯ı´ah compliance aspects. Even conventional
banks take part in real business activities, the best example of which is Merchant Banking
in Germany. Therefore, Islamic banks’ trading activities, fulfilling all conditions prescribed
in Islamic commercial law, should not be equated with interest. Below we will discuss the
second aspect in detail.
An important difference between a trade’s profit and Riba is that the former is a result of
real investment activity in which the business risk is allocated more evenly among all the
parties involved, whereas in Riba-based business, reward is guaranteed to a party leaving
the other party in risk. As such, Riba-based transactions do not fulfil the important Shar ¯ı´ah
principle of “Al-Kharaj bi-al-Daman”, which signifies that one can claim profit only if he is
ready to take liability – bear the business risk, if any. The rationale of this principle is that
earning profit is legitimized by engaging in an economic activity and thereby contributing
to the development of resources and society.
The profit margin earned by a trader is justified firstly because he provides a definite
service in the form of seeking out, locating and purchasing goods for his client, for which
he is allowed to charge a certain amount of profit, and secondly, he takes business risk in
11 Holy Qur’ ¯an, IV: 29.
12 Bukhari (Al Asqalani), 5, p. 46, No. 2373.
13 Abu Hanifah, n.d., II, p. 351. The Prophet is also reported to have said: “Allah will let the man enter the paradise who is an
easy purchaser (in bargaining), an easy vendor (in selling), an easy debtor (in repaying the debts) and an easy creditor (in lending
and demanding back the loans).” Ibn Hajar, 1998, 4, p. 388.
14 See Kazmi, 2004.


----- p.133 (pdf 161) -----


Trading in Islamic Commercial Law 133
obtaining the goods, like damage in storage or in transit and market and price risks. All
these activities and risks justify his earning a profit, even if the margin of profit in the case
of a credit sale of a commodity is more than the margin involved in the cash market price
of that commodity. The Shar ¯ı´ah permits a trader to sell for cash or on credit subject to
the condition that the price, once agreed between the parties at the time of bargain, is not
changed, even if the payment is not made by the due date.
On the other hand, earning money from money on the basis of interest creates a rentier
class, giving a smaller and smaller share of the national produce to those doing real work
for the creation of wealth in the economy. Islamic financial institutions, while undertaking
trade services, have to fulfil the conditions required for valid sales.
The permissibility of a higher credit price than the cash price will be discussed in a
subsequent section of this chapter.
6.4 TYPES OF BAI‘
With respect to legality, there are a number of types of Bai‘ that can be valid (Sahih), void
(Batil), voidable (F ¯asid) and suspended (Mawquf). We have discussed these in detail in the
previous chapter. The Hanafi jurists, in particular, have categorized sale into Bai‘ Nafiz or
Sahih, Bai‘ Batil and Bai‘ F ¯asid, on the basis of certain rules. 15 While Batil means a contract
in which ownership title is not transferred and, therefore, is not Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant and not
enforceable, F ¯asid refers to a contract that involves any violation of Shar ¯ı´ah rules that is not
of a severe nature, and if parties to the contract are agreed and some modifications are made,
it is considered enforceable. If the transfer of title is subject to any specific conditions, it is
a Mawquf, or suspended, sale. 16
The most important type of valid Bai‘ is exchanging any commodity with money on
the spot or at credit (Bai‘ al Mutlaq). The exchange of various kinds of money or goods
representing money, e.g. gold, silver, Dollars, Rupees, etc., is called Bai‘ al Sarf. The
exchange of goods with goods is called barter (Bai‘ al Muq ¯ayaza).17 Other forms are:
Mu’ajjal, where the price of the property is deferred to a future but definite time; and Salam,
when a sale contract is made by immediate payment against the future delivery of the
commodity. All types of Bai‘ have their own rules to become acceptable modes of business
in Shar ¯ı´ah. Various forms of Bai‘ with respect to the counter values, which have already
been defined in Chapter 5, are shown in Figure 6.1.
6.5 REQUIREMENTS OF A VALID SALE CONTRACT
Islamic banks have to undertake trade that is governed by some rules, as per the Islamic Shar¯ı´ah.
The rules broadly pertain to proper offer and acceptance by the respective parties, free consent
of the seller and buyer, legality of the wares and anything used as a medium of exchange, the
importance of record-keeping in business, security, discharging one’s due in full, fulfilment of
promise, etc (Figure 6.2). A sale must be prompt and absolute because a sale attributed to a
15 Al Jaziri, 1973, 2, p. 300; Usmani, 2000b, pp. 71–80.
16 Al Jaziri, 1973, 2, p. 292.
17 Al Jaziri, 1973, 2, pp. 290–300.


----- p.134 (pdf 162) -----


134 Understanding Islamic Finance
Exchange
Sale
Bai‘ al Sarf
Deferred
Payment
Sale
Bai‘ al-
Nasia
Instalment
Sale
Bai‘ al-
Taqseet
Credit Sale
Tauliyyah
Selling at
cost
Direct
Purchase
& Sale
(2 parties)
Direct
Possession
by Seller/
Bank
3rd party
Agent
Client as
Agent
Promise/
Agreement
to Sale
(3 parties)
Murabaha
Bargain on
Profit
Margin
Musawamah
Bargain on
Price
Muhatah
at discount
on cost
Cash/Spot
Sale
Absolute
Sale
Bai‘ Mutliq
Bai‘ Salam
Prepayment/
Deferred
delivery sale
Bai‘ Istisna'a
Order to
Manufacture
Periodic
payment
Future Sale
Barter Sale
Bai‘ al
Muqayaza
Valid Sale
Figure 6.1 Forms of Bai‘ with respect to counter values
future date or a sale contingent on a future event is void/voidable and the parties will have to
execute it afresh when the future date comes or the contingency actually occurs.
The approved forms of Bai‘ reflect the main principles of mutual consent of the parties and
justice, with an emphasis on good manners, leniency and honesty. Mutual consent can exist
only when there is volition, truthfulness as against coercion, fraud and lying. Justice includes
imperatives like fulfilment of promise and contracts, correct weights and measures, clear and
definite stipulation of price, nature and amount of work, wages and payments, honesty and
sincerity.18 Good manners prescribed by the Shar ¯ı´ah in conducting any business include
politeness, forgiveness, due compensation and removal of hardship faced by others. 19
18 For various conditions see Al Jaziri, 1973, pp. 318, 324, 325, 327, 330, 336.
19 Al-Zoor (wrong/false statements) has been included by the holy Prophet among the Kaba’ir (Tirmidhi, 1988, p. 2, No. 965);
Al Jaziri, 1973, 2, p. 305.


----- p.135 (pdf 163) -----


Trading in Islamic Commercial Law 135
Certain
Muta’ayyan
Known
(Malum)
Price
(Thaman)
Usable
(not prohibited
in Shari ′ah)
Valuable
 Ownership/
risk of seller
Valid for
Ownership/
Possession
Existent/
existable
Subject Matter
(Mabi’e)
Constructive
(Hukmi)
Physical
(Haqiqi)
Delivery/Conveyance
(Qabza)
Valid Bai ‘
Figure 6.2 Elements of valid Bai‘
The seller and the buyer must have an understanding and sufficient discretion; the com-
modity sold and its price should be known to both parties, it should have value in law
and must be in existence and/or it must be susceptible to delivery of possession, either
immediately or at some future time. This last condition is specific to a Salam sale.
6.5.1 The Object of the Sale Contract
Jurists have emphasized the clear identification or specification of the subject matter of a
sale contract and its definite delivery to the buyer. They require a number of conditions
concerning the object, which must be satisfied for a valid sale. As this aspect has already been
discussed in detail in the previous chapter, here we shall briefly indicate the main conditions.
First, the object must be pure, lawful (Mub ¯ah), clean, wholesome and, of course, marketable
and bearing legal value. It must be M ¯al-e-Mutaqawam (wealth having a commercial value);
its underlying cause (Sabab) must be lawful, and it must not be proscribed by Islamic law;
it should not be a nuisance to public order or morality. For example, the sale and trading of
commodities such as wine or alcoholic products, pork and pork products is prohibited, and
contracts involving such commodities are void on the grounds of their illegality. 20 The flesh
and bones of animals that have died by other means than ritual slaughter (Halal) cannot be
sold. Idols are also forbidden commodities.
Second, the object must be in existence at the time of the contract and the vendor must be
the real owner of the commodity to be sold. What is not owned by the seller cannot be sold.
For example, if a bank sells to clien t C a car which is presently owned by factory F, but the
20 Muslim, 1981 with annotation by Nawavi, 11, pp. 6–8; Tirmidhi, 1988, 2, p. 27; Al Jaziri, 1973, 2, p. 293.


----- p.136 (pdf 164) -----


136 Understanding Islamic Finance
bank is hopeful that it will buy it from F and shall deliver it subsequently to C, the sale will
be void according to the Shar ¯ı´ah. At the most, the bank can make a promise to sell.
A related condition is that of taking possession of the goods before their sale. As reported
by Imam Bukhari: “Ibn Umar narrated ‘I saw the people buy food stuff randomly (i.e. blindly
without measuring it) in the life time of the Prophet and they were punished if they tried
to sell it before carrying it into their own houses’.” Qastalani in his commentary on Sahih
Bukhari reports that before the commodity comes into the possession of the vendee it is
not lawful for sale according to Imam Shafi‘e, Muhammad and some other jurists. 21 Many
jurists, including the Hanafis, have, however, contended that for a lawful sale transaction,
it is sufficient that the item of sale must be present and fully known, leaving no room for
ignorance or dispute, and that physical possession is not necessary for a valid sale. It is also
ascertained in Majallah that delivery of the sale item on the part of the vendor is completed
when he sets it aside for the vendee and there is nothing to restrict him from taking physical
possession from the vendor whenever he desires. 22
Accordingly, a purchaser who has not got possession of a commodity cannot sell it onward.
For example, if A has purchased a car from B, but B has not yet delivered it to A or to his
agent, A cannot sell that car to C and if he sells it before taking its actual or constructive
delivery from B, the sale is void.
As discussed earlier, the condition of existence of the sale item at the time of execution of
the contract has been mitigated by the authorization of Bai‘ Salam and Istisna‘a contracts,
which cover the future supply and future manufacture of goods respectively. Scholars deduce
from this permissibility that when the object of a contract is a particular thing, it must be in
existence at the time of the contract. Accordingly, if A sells the unborn calf of his cow to
B, the contract is void because of Gharar. But where the object is a promise to deliver or to
manufacture with given specifications, the object of that promise needs not be in existence
at the time of the contract, but must be possible and definite, i.e. it must be capable of being
defined in such a way as to avoid Gharar, Jahl or uncertainty about its delivery and dispute
about its quality.
Fourth, the object of a sale contract must be capable of certain delivery. Jurists, therefore,
have prohibited the sale of a camel which has fled, a bird in the air or a fish in water. 23
As such, a stolen motor vehicle cannot be sold until found and seen by both parties. It
is important to indicate that the overriding concern of jurists is to prevent conflict and
unjustified profits arising out of uncertain contracts. The condition that, for execution of the
contract, the object must be capable of delivery can be understood as an aspect of the right
to title, namely that the object must be in the ownership of the person intending to sell and
the right to transfer must be legal and its quantity and value must be known. If the object of
a contract is a promise to deliver or manufacture a good in the future, the promise must be
feasible and the goods to be delivered must be known (defined).
Among examples mentioned by jurists for the inability to deliver is the sale of a debt
against another debt, the sale of that which one does not have in one’s possession and the sale
by a buyer of what he has bought before he takes possession. Similarly, a sale is void if its
future existence is uncertain in that it may or may not exist, for example, the sale of what a
she-camel may give birth to. However, jurists differ on whether all nonexistent commodities
21 Irshad-al-Sari, Sharah, Sahih Bukhari, 4,p .5 7 .
22 Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Majallah, Articles 262, 263; Al-Marghinani, Hidaya: 3, pp. 58–59.
23 Zuhayli, 1985, 4, pp. 503, 504.


----- p.137 (pdf 165) -----


Trading in Islamic Commercial Law 137
cannot be sold or only those that involve Gharar. Ibn Taymiyah is of the view that there
is no evidence to prove that the sale of every nonexistent item is impermissible /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmithere
is another cause for the prohibition of the sale of nonexistent objects and that is Gharar.
A nonexistent item cannot be sold, not because it is nonexistent but because it involves
Gharar. For example, the “sale for years” (also called Mua‘awamah), in which fruits of a
tree or an orchard are sold for more than one year to come, and the sale of Habl al Hablah
is prohibited.24 Therefore, with regard to the Prophet’s saying: “do not sell what you do not
possess”, scholars contend that what is meant by possession here is the inability to deliver
the goods. So, from the seller’s part, he must be sure that he can deliver the goods.
Nawavi, in his annotation to Sahih Muslim, has reported that people used to buy from the
caravans without weighing, measuring or even estimating precisely. 25 Selling goods onward
could be unjust to the buyers, so they were asked to take possession before selling. This
is also evident from the words of Imam Bukhari: “Ibn Umar (Gbpwh) narrated ‘I saw the
people buy food stuff randomly (i.e. blindly without measuring it) in the life time of the holy
Prophet (pbuh) and they were punished if they tried to sell it before carrying it into their
own houses. Similarly, a heap of grain was purchased, considering it a specific amount, the
purchaser was asked first to take delivery of the declared amount and then to sell onward’.” 26
The rationale behind this seems to be that the seller should take the risk and reward of
his trade activity. 27 So long as the sold commodity remains with the seller – the buyer has
neither made payment nor taken its possession, its risk and reward are that of the seller.
Goods subject to Salam and Istisna‘a and the conditions required for their permission are
the best examples of the permissibility of nonexistent but defined goods. It is commonly
understood that Salam goods can also not be sold before taking their possession, and the
following Hadith is reported for this: The holy Prophet said: “A person who purchases
something on Salam, he should not transfer it to others before its transmutation (taking
its possession)”. 28 But the sale of Salam goods needs more detail (given in Chapter 10),
particularly in view of the fact that the above Hadith is “weak”. 29 Salam is an exception
and goods purchased through Salam can be sold onward on the basis of (Parallel) Salam. If
we were to strictly observe the spirit of this Hadith, Parallel Salam would not be possible.
Further, the Salam purchaser undertakes the business risk after the Salam contract is executed;
prices may fall or rise, he has to take possession of the goods.
Ibn Hazm explains that whatever a person owns should be taken as if it is in his possession
although the commodity might be in Hind. 30 Many other jurists, including the Hanafis,
have contended that for a lawful sale transaction, it is sufficient that the item of sale must
be present and fully known, leaving no room for ignorance and dispute, and that physical
possession is not a necessary condition of a valid sale. 31 It is also ascertained in Majallah
that delivery of the sale item on the part of the vendor is completed when he sets it aside
for the vendee and there is nothing to prevent the buyer from taking physical possession
24 Tirmidhi, 1988, No. 1335, p. 32, cf. Al-Dhareer, 1997, pp. 31, 32, see also Muslim (x/95, 200), Nisai, n.d., 7, pp. 293, 294.
25 Muslim, 1981, with annotation by Nawavi, 10, pp. 168–169.
26 Bukhari, Bab al Kail ’alal Baai’i.
27 Tirmidhi, 1988, No. 1308–1033, p. 25.
28 Abu Daud 1952, Kitab al Buyoo, Al Salaf la Yohawal .
29 Ibn Hajar, 1998, 3, No. 1203, p. 69.
30 Ibn Hazm, 7, 1988, p. 475.
31 Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Majallah, Articles 197–200, 262.


----- p.138 (pdf 166) -----


138 Understanding Islamic Finance
from the vendor whenever he desires. 32 Hence, if A has purchased a car from B, who has
placed the car in a garage where A has free access and A is allowed to take delivery, real or
constructive, from that place whenever he wishes, the car is in the constructive possession
of A and if he sells it to C without acquiring physical possession, the sale is valid.
This implies that as the purchaser has taken the liability of the risk, he is considered the
owner of the commodity, although the asset/commodity is still in the godown of the seller
or even in any other country or area. Hence, if a Karachi-based bank contracts to purchase
one hundred thousand bags of fertilizer from a factory in Lahore and the factory sets the
bags aside and gives constructive possession to the bank, the bank is considered the rightful
owner of the fertilizer and is capable of selling it to any third party. So long as the bags are
not sold, the asset, market or price risk will be that of the bank and not of the factory.
However, one can promise to sell something which is not yet owned or possessed.
Similarly, one can promise to buy any asset with given specifications. In the case of promise,
the actual sale will have to be executed after the commodity comes into the possession of the
seller, with proper offer and acceptance, and unless the sale is formally executed, the promise
will have no legal consequences. Normally, a promise creates just a moral obligation on the
promisor to fulfil his promise, but if the promisee has incurred any liability or expense as a
result of the promise and the promisor backs out, the latter should be held responsible for
the actual loss to the promisee.
6.5.2 Prices and the Profit Margin
As a principle, Islam is not inclined to fix prices or profit margins for traders and leaves them
to be settled by the forces of demand and supply. The holy Prophet (pbuh) is reported to
have allowed the competitive price mechanism to balance the demand and supply of goods
for the dispensation of economic justice, the best ultimate benefit of society and for efficient
allocation of resources. 33 The limitations are only to take care of some moral, religious and
cultural perceptions and aspirations, which give an important place to the State in ensuring
the desired norms. 34
However, Islam has ordained transparency in respect of features/qualities of the wares
and honesty in dealing. In a market where buyers and sellers trade with liberty, the parties
can bargain on any price. In Sunan Abu Daud, we come across a very interesting instance.
The holy Prophet (pbuh) sent one of his Companions (‘Urwah) to purchase for him a goat
and gave him one dinar. Urwah went to the market and purchased two goats for one dinar,
then sold one of them in the market for one dinar and gave the holy Prophet a goat and also
one dinar. The holy Prophet was so happy with his honesty and expertise that he prayed for
the promotion of his trade and business. 35
With regard to pricing, the Islamic Fiqh Council of the OIC, in its fifth session, resolved
the following:
32 Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Majallah, Article 263; Al-Marghinani, Hidaya, 3, pp. 58–59.
33 Tirmidhi, 1988, No. 1336 (also in Abu Daud, 1952, Kitab al Buyoo).
34 If suppliers of the goods do not act judiciously and the authorities fail to protect consumer rights, prices can be fixed in
consultation with the experts in the relevant field. See Waliullah, 1353 H, 2,p .3 8 .
35 Tirmidhi, 1988, No. 1281, p. 18; Abu Daud, 1952, Kitab al Buyoo, Bab fel Mudarib.


----- p.139 (pdf 167) -----


Trading in Islamic Commercial Law 139
1. The basic principle in the Qur’ ¯an and the Sunnah of the Prophet (pbuh) is that a person
should be free to buy and sell and dispose of his possessions and money, within the
framework of the Islamic Shar ¯ı´ah.
2. There is no restriction on the percentage of profit a trader may make in his transactions.
It is generally left to the merchants themselves, the business environment and the nature
of the merchant and of the goods. Regard should be given, however, to the ethics
recommended by the Shar ¯ı´ah, such as moderation, contention, leniency and indulgence.
3. Shar ¯ı´ah texts have spelt out the necessity to keep transactions away from illicit acts like
fraud, cheating, deceit, forgery, concealment of actual benefits and monopoly, which are
detrimental to society and individuals.
4. Governments should not be involved in fixing prices except when obvious pitfalls are
noticed within the market and the price, due to artificial factors. In this case, governments
should intervene by applying adequate means to get rid of these factors, the causes of
defects, excessive price increases and fraud.
The Shar¯ı´ah does not allow excessive profiteering (Ghaban-e-Fahish), which means that
a person sells a commodity stating explicitly or giving the impression that he is charging
the market price, when actually he is charging an exorbitant price, taking benefit from the
ignorance of the purchaser. 36 If the purchaser comes to know afterwards that he has been
charged excessively, he has the option to rescind the contract and take back his money.
Although jurists in general do not recommend any specific profit rates in trading, we find
inferences in books that the maximum profit rate to be charged in trade should be 5 % in
respect of wares, 10 % in case of animals and 20 % in real estate. 37
6.5.3 Cash and Credit Prices
In medieval Islamic trade, not only was buying and selling on credit accepted and apparently
widespread, but also the credit performed many important functions in trade transitions. We
find a lot of detail in Fiqh books on various aspects of trade transactions on credit.
Most jurists believe that the seller can indicate two prices, i.e. one for cash and another
for a credit transaction, but one of the two prices must be settled in the same meeting. They,
however, qualify this with the condition that the difference should be a normal practice of
the market, the aim should be the business of trade and the seller should not resort to the
practice of Ghaban-e-Fahish. The following tradition is important in this regard: “The person
who makes two bargains in one sale, the lower of the two is lawful for him or he would be
charging Riba”. 38 Jurists like Sem ¯ak, Aoz ¯aii and others have interpreted this as a situation
where a person declares in the sale contract that in the case of credit, the sale price will be
so much, and in the case of cash, so much. 39
Besides the situation described above, another situation is where the seller declares only
one price, the credit price, higher than the price prevalent in the market, and the buyer agrees
to buy at that price. Jurists differ regarding the legality of charging this excess on account of
the period allowed for the payment of the price. The jurists who disapprove argue that the
seller himself may not differentiate between the cash and credit price, but if the purchaser
36 For detail on Ghaban-e-Fahish, see Al Jaziri, 1973, 2, pp. 570–573.
37 Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Majallah, Article 165.
38 Abu Daud, 1752, 3, p. 274.
39 Thanwi, n.d., 14, p. 273.


----- p.140 (pdf 168) -----


140 Understanding Islamic Finance
feels that he has been charged an excess on account of a delay, the transaction will be
usurious. However, other jurists, mostly belonging to Shafi‘e and Hanafi schools, deem this
form lawful on the grounds that the seller sells the goods on a deferred payment basis and
stipulates, at the time of the bargain, the whole price in return for the sale item. This is just
like the situation where, for example, a seller declares to the buyer that the price will be $10
if he purchases it today and $11 tomorrow. This is permissible according to all jurists, as
the seller has the right to demand the price, keeping in mind the time of the sale contract.
The difference in price therein is in lieu of the item of sale and not as a reward for time.
They argue that the permissibility of the form under consideration can be derived therefrom.
However, when the price is stipulated once, it should not be subject to any change, keeping
in mind the period of time given for payment. 40
Imam Tirmidhi in his J ¯am‘i has also reported that the holy Prophet (pbuh) forbade two
sales in one contract. According to Tirmidhi, some jurists have explained this in the sense
that a person states: “I sell this cloth for cash for 10 and on credit for 20 (dirhams)” and at
separation, one price is not settled. If one of the two prices is settled, it is not prohibited. 41
Tohfatul Ahwazi, Sharah J ¯am‘i al Tirmidhi, explains that if the seller says that he sells the
cloth for 10 for cash and 20 on credit, and the buyer accepts either of the two prices; or if
a buyer says that he purchases for 20 on credit or the parties separate having settled on any
of the prices, the sale will be valid. 42
Jurist Shuk ¯ani explains the above aspect and concludes that if the purchaser in such a
situation says: “I accept for 1000 for cash” or “for 2000 on credit”, this would be all right. 43
He adds that the ‘Illah (effective cause) for prohibition of two sales in one is the nonfixity
of the price. 44 He has a separate booklet on the subject wherein he maintains that he reached
the conclusion after thorough research. 45
Shah Waliullah in Muaswwa, Sharah Al Mu’watta , writes that if the parties separate after
settlement on one price, the contract is valid and there is no difference of opinion in this
regard.46
Among scholars of the present age, the late Shaikh Abdullah ibn B ¯az, who was the most
honoured grand Mufti of Saudi Arabia, permitted instalments sale wherein the credit price
could be higher than the cash price. 47
Jurists allow this difference, considering it a genuine market practice. It is quite natural
that in the market, the credit price of a commodity should be more than its cash price at a
point in time, while in forward purchase, the future price will be less than the cash price
(that is why the Companions asked the holy Prophet (pbuh) about the validity of Salam/Salaf
when Riba was prohibited and the holy Prophet allowed it on the condition that the price,
quality and delivery of the goods should be stipulated).
In the words of eminent Hanafi jurist Sarakhsi: “Selling on credit is an absolute feature
of trade”. In discussing the rights of a managing partner in a Musharakah contract, Sarakhsi
says: “We hold that selling for credit is part of the practice of merchants, and that it is the
40 Thanwi, n.d., 14, p. 134; Al Sanani, 1972, pp. 136–137.
41 Tirmidhi, 1988, No. 1254.
42 Mubarakpuri, n.d., 2, p. 236.
43 Shuk¯ani, n.d., 5,p .1 2 .
44 Ibid.
45 Shuk¯ani, Shifa al Khilal fe hukm-e-ziadat al thaman al Mujarrad wala’jal.
46 Waliullah, 1353 H, 2, pp. 28, 29.
47 Ibn B ¯az, 1995, p. 142.


----- p.141 (pdf 169) -----


Trading in Islamic Commercial Law 141
most conducive means for the achievement of the investor’s goal, which is profit. And in
most cases, profit can only be achieved by selling for credit and not selling for cash.” He
further states: “A thing is sold on credit for a larger sum than it would be sold for cash”. 48
The comments of Abraham L. Udovitch on the views expressed by Sarakhsi are worth
mentioning: “This statement makes clear as to why there was a greater profit to be derived
from credit transactions /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiThe difference in price between a credit and cash sale also helps
explain why the prohibition against usury, to the extent that it was observed, did not exercise
any crippling restriction on the conduct of commerce. For, while the difference in the price
for which one sells on credit and the price for which one sells for cash does not formally and
legally constitute interest, it does fulfil, from the point of view of its economic functions,
the same role as interest. It provides a return to the creditor for the risk involved in the
transaction and compensates him for the absence of his capital.” 49
Udovitch, however, overstates the case when saying that the difference in the cash and
credit prices of a commodity fulfils the same role as interest. Islamic economics has the
genuine provision of converting money into assets and then one can measure its utility.
While it concedes the concept of time value of money to the extent of pricing in credit sales,
it does not generate rent on the capital as interest does in credits and advances, creating a
rentier class. Money is a means of exchange. As per the rules of the Shar ¯ı´ah, $1000 today
will be $1000 tomorrow. However, what matters is the translation of 1000 dollars into an
asset, in which case that $1000 asset may be worth more or less in any number of years one
may consider. Therefore, value has to be in the context of any asset, in which case it can be
higher or lower in the future.
The jurists have also derived argument on the difference between cash and credit prices
from the Holy Qur’ ¯an. The Qur’ ¯an has reported nonbelievers saying: “The sale is very
similar to Riba.” (2: 275) Referring to this verse, Shaikh Taqi Usmani says: “Their objection
was that when we increase the price of a commodity in the original transaction of sale
because of its being based on deferred payment it is treated as a valid sale; but when we
want to increase the due amount after the maturity date and the debtor is not able to pay,
it is termed Riba, while the increase in both cases seems to be similar.” This objection has
been specifically mentioned by the famous commentator of the Holy Qur’ ¯an Ibn-Abi-H ¯atim:
“They used to say that it is all equal whether we increase the price in the beginning of the
sale, or we increase it at the time of maturity. Both are equal. It is this objection which has
been referred to in the verse /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmi”50 The Holy Qur’ ¯an’s response to the above thinking of
nonbelievers was: “and Allah has permitted trading, and prohibited Riba”.
Allamah Sayyuti has quoted from Mujahid that “people used to sell goods on credit; at
the time when the payment was due, they used to give extension against enhanced prices. At
this, the verse ‘Do not eat Riba doubled and redoubled’ was revealed.” 51 Ibne Jarir Tabari
has reported from Qat ¯adah a similar situation of Riba involvement in which a person sold
48 Al Sarakhsi, n.d., 22, p. 45; cf. Udovitch, 1970, pp. 78, 79.
49 Udovitch, 1970, p. 80.
50 Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, pp. 536–538; Ibn-abi-H ¯atim reports: “ /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiwhen the payment became due the debtor used to say
to the creditor: ‘give me more time, I would give you more than your amount’, when it was indicated that it amounted to Riba,
they used to say that it was all equal whether we increase the price in the beginning of the sale, or we increase it at the time of
maturity, both are equal. It is this objection which has been referred to in the verse by saying ‘They say that the sale is very similar
to Riba’.” (Ibn-abi-H ¯atim, 1997, 2, Nos. 2891, 2892, p. 545.
51 Sayyuti, 2003/1423.


----- p.142 (pdf 170) -----


142 Understanding Islamic Finance
any commodity on a credit price payable at any agreed time; when the payment was due and
the purchaser could not pay it, the price was enhanced and the time for payment extended. 52
It can safely be derived from the above discussion that a transaction of credit sale with
a price higher than the spot price is acceptable. 53 What is prohibited is that the price,
once mutually stipulated, is enhanced due to any delay in its payment. This is because a
commodity, once sold, becomes the property of the purchaser on a permanent basis and the
seller has no right to re-price a commodity that he has already sold, and also because the
price becomes a debt.
The difference in price has become a customary factor due to market competition and the
free play of market forces and clients are ready to pay a price for the benefit to be achieved
by them of having purchased goods without making cash payments. Therefore, according to
many jurists, this aspect is approved by the Nass (clear text of the Shar ¯ı´ah) from the Salaf
(forebears).54
Accordingly, absolute certainty on price is necessary for the validity of a sale. All jurists
agree that if one definite price is not stipulated in the case of a credit sale, it will become
Riba and therefore unlawful. For example, A says to B: “If you pay within a month, the
price is 10 dollars, and if you pay after two months, the price is 12 dollars”; B agrees without
absolutely determining one of the two prices. As the price remains uncertain the sale is void,
unless any one of the two alternatives is agreed upon by the parties at the time of concluding
the transaction.
Another point to be clarified is that a person who has bought an asset on credit can sell
it onward after taking its possession, even if he has not made full payment of its price. If a
client C purchases a car on Murabaha, with the price payable in five years, from day one,
C is the owner of the car and is liable to the bank for the agreed amount according to the
agreed schedule. He can sell the car for any reason after one year, for example to Y, who
agrees to pay the remaining installments. Although C has not paid all the instalments, this
would not be considered a “sale of what he doesn’t own”.
6.6 RIBA INVOLVEMENT IN SALES
Sales contracts could involve Riba Al-Fadl, as discussed in Chapter 3. In this regard, rules for
the mutual exchange of homogeneous or heterogeneous commodities have a direct relevance
to the rules of trading. The mutual exchange of ’Ay ¯an (commodities of material value in
themselves) is subject to rules different from the exchange of Athman (having monetary
values or prices). When an article of the kind of Thaman or price is sold or exchanged with
an article of the same kind, the law requires that there must be mutual delivery and each of
the articles must be equal in weight to the other. The following commonly known Hadith of
the holy Prophet forms the basis of discussion on this aspect of exchange: “Gold for gold,
silver for silver, wheat for wheat, barley for barley, dates for dates and salt for salt – like
for like, equal for equal and hand to hand; if the commodities differ, then you may sell as
52 Tabari, n.d., 6,p .8 .
53 Accordingly, the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the OIC and Shar ¯ı´ah supervisory boards of all Islamic banks approve the legality of
this difference in price.
54 For details, see Sahifah Ahl-Hadith (Urdu), February 24, 1993.


----- p.143 (pdf 171) -----


Trading in Islamic Commercial Law 143
you wish, provided that the exchange is hand to hand”. 55 Exchange rules need to be seen in
the light of this saying, as discussed in Chapter 4.
The sale and purchase of currencies and foreign exchange dealings are included in the
normal activities of banks and financial institutions. It is imperative, therefore, that when a
sale transaction is taking place among currencies, the exchange has to take place instantly
and not on a deferred basis. In this regard, a normal time required for payment/settlement
is allowed by the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars provided that it does not become a condition of the
exchange. The OIC Islamic Fiqh Academy and the Shar ¯ı´ah advisory committee of Al Baraka
Bank allow the use of an otherwise Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant credit card for the purchase of gold
and silver, as an unintentional delay of up to 72 hours does not create a problem in respect
of payment. 56
6.7 GHARA R – A CAUSE OF PROHIBITION OF SALES
Gharar is one of the main factors that make a transaction un-Islamic. This subject has been
discussed in detail in Chapter 3. Here we shall indicate the overall theme of Gharar and the
kinds of sale that have been prohibited on its account.
“Gharar” means hazard, chance, stake or risk. In the legal terminology of jurists, “Gharar”
is the sale of a thing which is not present at hand or whose consequence is not known or a
sale involving hazard in which one does not know whether it will come to be or not, as in the
sale of a fish in water or a bird in the air. From this the jurists derive the general principle
that a sale must not be doubtful or uncertain as far as the rights and obligations of the parties
are concerned, otherwise it would be tantamount to deceiving the other party. The object of
the contract must be precisely determined, and price and terms must be clear and known.
The general principles with regard to avoiding Gharar in sale transactions that have been
derived by jurists are: the contracts must be free from absolute uncertainty about the subject
matter and its counter value in exchanges. The uncertainty leads to risk but all risks are not
Gharar, because business risk is not only a part of life but also a valid requirement for taking
a return in exchanges. The requirement is that the commodity must be defined, determined
and deliverable and clearly known to the contracting parties; quality and quantity must be
stipulated; the contract must not be doubtful or uncertain so far as the rights and obligations of
the contracting parties are concerned and the parties should know the actual state of the goods.
This implies that ignorance (Jahl) is also a part of Gharar that has to be avoided. The
purchaser should know about the existence and condition of the goods and the vendor should
be able to deliver them on the agreed terms and at the agreed time. In other words, one should
not undertake anything or any act blindly without sufficient knowledge, or risk oneself in
adventure without knowing the outcome or the consequences.
The holy Prophet (pbuh) prohibited all those transactions that involved Gharar (and Jahl).
These included, Bai‘ al-Ma‘dum, Bai‘ al-Mulamasah, Bai‘ al-Munabadhah, Bai‘ al Hasat,
and similar other contracts involving uncertainty. 57 Imam Malik defines Mulamasah and
Munabadhah thus: “Mulamasah is when a man touches or feels a garment, but does not
unfold it nor ascertain (its character). Munabadhah is when a man throws to another a
55 Tirmidhi, 1988, No. 1263–1994, also in Bukhari, Muslim, ’Ibn M ¯ajah.
56 Al Baraka Resolutions, 1995, No. 12/6, p. 193.
57 Tirmidhi, 1988, Nos. 1252, 1253 (p. 8), 1332 (p. 31), also see Bukhari, Sahih, Kitab al Buyoo.


----- p.144 (pdf 172) -----


144 Understanding Islamic Finance
garment in exchange for a garment that the other throws to him without both of them
examining them.” Imam Malik, therefore, says that it is not permissible to sell a Persian
mantle or shawl which is inside its cover or a Coptic garment in its fold unless they are
unfolded and their insides seen, because their sale (in their folded state) is a sale of risk.
Imam Malik did not, however, disallow the well-established practice of selling whole
bales of goods on the basis of their description in an accompanying catalogue or list of
contents (Barn ¯amaj), without actually unfolding them, for then it would become impossible
to conduct wholesale trade. He, therefore, says: “The sale of bales according to the Barn ¯amaj
is different from the sale of a Persian shawl in its cover or a garment in its fold. The
difference between them is (based on) the actual practice and their knowledge with the
people, and it continues to be among the allowable sales among the people because the sale
of bales according to the Barn ¯amaj without unfolding is not intended as a risk and has no
similarity to Mulamasah”. 58
In the present age, where a large number of goods are made under trademarks or where
minute specifications of goods can be stipulated in the contract, there may not be any
involvement of Gharar. Many jurists soften this condition in the case of nonedibles. 59
Accordingly, religious boards allow the banks to agree to provide goods other than edibles,
after purchasing them from the market. 60
A common Gharar-based transaction in the present age is that of a book-out contract, in
which a person buys an asset and then sells it without taking possession, only getting/paying
the difference in the purchase and sale prices. This happens in commodities, stocks and the
foreign exchange markets. In particular, a large part of the global foreign exchange markets
comprises book-out transactions involving speculation and excessive risk-taking. Exchange
does not actually take place and only paper entries give rise to the rights/liabilities of the
parties. The Shar ¯ı´ah committees and boards have declared such transactions prohibited. 61
6.8 CONDITIONAL SALES AND “TWO BARGAINS IN ONE
SALE”
The Shar¯ı´ah does not approve sales that are conditional upon such matters that may or not
may happen due to games of chance. In the Fiqh literature, we come across the prohibition
of two stipulations in a sale: Shartaan fi Ba‘ien, or sale with a stipulation, and Bai‘wal Shart,
which involves lack of clarity and an unjustifiable benefit to any of the parties. For example,
a person says to another: “I will sell you this house if any third person sells me his house”. 62
Gharar in this transaction pertains to the time of the meeting, the condition and finalization
of the contract. Conditions of gift, marriage, Qard or Shirkah as a part of a sale contract
render it a prohibited contract from the Shar ¯ı´ah angle.
Hanafi jurists consider such conditional contracts a type of gambling. Ibn Abideen opines
that sales that are the instruments of ownership cannot be postponed to the future nor can
they be conditional upon realization of an event in the future, as this involves gambling. 63
58 Malik, 1985, pp. 423, 424.
59 Tirmidhi, 1988, explanation at No. 1314, p. 26.
60 Al Baraka, Fatawa, 1997, p. 91.
61 Al Baraka, Fatawa, 1997, p. 102.
62 Ibn Qudama has given a number of examples for such sales, 1367 AH, 4, pp. 234, 235. Also see pp. 225–227.
63 Ibn Abideen; Mustafa al babi, 1367 H, IV, p. 324.


----- p.145 (pdf 173) -----


Trading in Islamic Commercial Law 145
However, Ibn Taymiyah and Ibnul Qayyim allow certain types of suspended sale, not seeing
any Gharar in the same. To them, such conditions are permitted to be attached to sales that do
not involve Gharar and Riba. Ibn Taymiyah rejects only those stipulations which contradict
a clear provision of the Qur’ ¯an, the Sunnah or the scholarly consensus, or which contradict
the very object of a contract, nullifying it. Ibn Hazm, in al-Muhallah, has maintained seven
types of conditions that can be enforced, including Rihn in Bai‘, delay in payment in a credit
sale (with stipulated time of payment), traits or features of the goods to be traded and other
conditions mutually agreed upon and not against the rules of Shar ¯ı´ah.64
The holy Prophet is reported to have said: “unlawful are a sale and a loan (Bai‘ wal Salaf),
or two stipulations in a sale, or a sale of what you do not have.” 65 Imam Malik defined Bai‘
wal Salaf, the contract of selling and lending, as being like one man saying to another: “I
shall purchase your goods for such and such if you lend me such and such”. If they agree to
a transaction in this manner, it is not permitted. If the one who stipulates the loan, abandons
his stipulation, the sale is permitted. Shah Waliullah has explained it as co-mingling of a
loan with a sale, which involves Jahl/hazard and is therefore not valid. 66 The Prophet (pbuh)
is reported to have said: “Prevent them from making /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmia selling and lending (contract)
(concurrently) /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmi.67 Imam Ahmad explained it as if a person gives a loan to someone and
then sells to him something at a higher than market price. 68
Combining contracts which are conditional upon each other confuses the rights and
liabilities of the parties and obstructs fair remedies in the event of default, thereby opening
a door to Riba and Gharar. In this regard, Ibn Taymiyah is the most liberal, objecting only
to the combination of onerous and gratuitous contracts, such as sale and loan (Qard), since
by such arrangement parties can easily hide an illegal compensation for the loan. Modern
scholars seem to follow this view, since the combination of contracts occurs quite frequently.
One alternative in this regard is to combine contracts informally, without legally condition-
ing one on the other. Tawarruq, for example, is a transaction whereby a needy person buys
something on credit and then immediately, in a separate transaction with another party, sells
it for cash. Most scholars have declared this permissible. Such a ruling reflects the fact that
behaviour like this cannot be regulated by law but only by moral ruling. Shar ¯ı´ah principles
require that the exchange value should neither be bunched with gift nor made contingent
upon any loan or Shirkah condition. For example, a person, says: “Sell me this; I will give
you that much gift in addition to price”. 69 This involves Gharar and Jahl and the seller should
rather decrease the price so as to determine exactly the counter value paid by the buyer.
6.9 BAI‘ AL‘ARB ¯UN (DOWNPAYMENT SALE)
‘Arb¯un sale has been defined as a sale of downpayment, with the condition that if the buyer
takes the commodity, the downpayment will become part of the selling price, and if he does
not purchase the commodity, the advance money will be forfeited. 70 Two traditions of the
64 Ibn Hazm, 1988, 7, pp. 319–331, No. 1447.
65 Tirmidhi, 1988.
66 Waliullah, 1353 H, 2, p. 28; Nisai with Sharah Al Sayyuti, 7, p. 295.
67 Tirmidhi, 1988, No. 1257, p. 9.
68 Ibn Qudama, 1367 AH, 4, p. 235.
69 Al Baraka, 1997 (6: 24), p. 101.
70 Al-Marghinani, iv, p. 232; Al-Baji, 1332 AH, III, p. 495.


----- p.146 (pdf 174) -----


146 Understanding Islamic Finance
holy Prophet have been reported in this regard. A Hadith quoted by Imam Malik says that
the holy Prophet (pbuh) forbade ‘Arb ¯un sale. According to another Hadith, Zaid ibn Aslam
asked the holy Prophet (pbuh) about ‘Arb ¯un as a part of a sale; the Prophet permitted it.
The majority of traditional jurists accept the Hadith prohibiting ‘Arb ¯un sale due to the
involvement of Gharar. However, Hanbalis allow it. 71 Later jurists are also divided about
its permissibility. Shaikh Al-Dhareer writes in this regard: “Jurists have disagreed on the
permissibility of ‘Arb ¯un sale. It was prohibited by the Hanafis, the Malikis, the Shafi‘es,
the Zaidi Shiites, Abul Khattab of the Hanbali school, and it was reported that Ibn Abbas
and Al-Hassan also forbade it. But it was approved by Imam Ahmad who narrated its
permissibility on the authority of Umar (Gbpwh) and his son and a group of the followers of
the Prophet’s Companions (Tabi‘een) including Mujahid, Ibn Sirin, Naf‘i Bin Abdel Harith
and Zaid Ibn Aslam”. He has reported Ibn Rushd saying: “The majority of scholars have
forbidden it because it involves Gharar, risk-taking and the taking of money without any
consideration in return”. 72
Ibn Qudama, a Hanbali jurist, justifies ‘Arb ¯un by comparing it with two similar contracts,
one is a transaction by which a buyer asks the seller to rescind a sale and offers the latter
a sum of money to do so. 73 He quotes Ibn Hanbal as saying that ‘Arb ¯un is in the same
category. The second contract is where a potential buyer pays a potential seller of goods
a sum in return for the latter’s agreeing not to sell the goods to anyone else. Later, the
buyer returns and buys the goods by final sale, deducting the initial payment from the price.
The latter sale is valid, since it is free of any condition. Ibn Qudama then hints that in this
second transaction, the advance payment would be unearned gain if the final sale were not
concluded, and would have to be returned on demand.
We can derive on the basis of the above discussion that in cases of involvement of absolute
Gharar or injustice with the buyer (when he committed to purchase, but cannot do so due to
any unforeseen happening), downpayment confiscation might not be permissible. However,
to the extent of a customary practice wherein parties do business in the market with free
consent and any unforeseen events are also taken into account, it would be permissible on
the basis of ‘Urf. The Islamic Fiqh Council of the OIC and the AAOIFI have also allowed
customary downpayment sale with the condition that a time limit is specified. 74
6.10 BAI‘ AL DAYN (SALE OF DEBT)
A credit document emerging from any transaction of credit sale represents a debt which
cannot be sold as per Shar ¯ı´ah rules due to the involvement of Gharar and/or Riba. A
trader selling a commodity on credit and thus having a bill of exchange, an export bill or a
promissory note cannot sell it to an Islamic bank as they could to a conventional bank. As
an alternative, the bank can serve as a trader and purchase the commodity from its producer
and then sell it to others who need it on credit, keeping a margin for itself. 75 The OIC Fiqh
Academy and Shar ¯ı´ah scholars in general consider the sale/purchase of such securities or
71 Zuhayli, 1985, 4, p. 508.
72 Al-Monataqa, 4/157; Nehayet al-Mohtaj, 3/459; Al-Moghni, 4/233; al-Bahr Al-Zakhkhar, 3/459; Bedayat al-Mujtahid, 2/162;
cf. Al-Dhareer, 1997, pp. 16, 17.
73 Ibn Qudama, 1367 AH, 4, p. 233.
74 Council of the Islamic Fiqh Academy, 2000, pp. 16, 17; AAOIFI 2004–5a, pp. 65, 66, 76.
75 Al Baraka, 1997, No. 9/12, pp. 152, 153.


----- p.147 (pdf 175) -----


Trading in Islamic Commercial Law 147
documents representing debt at a price other than their nominal value incompatible with
the tenets of the Shar ¯ı´ah. Even on face value, the sale of debt is allowed only when the
purchaser has recourse to the original debtor, as in the case of Hawalah.
“Al K ¯ali bil K ¯ali”, a maxim in the Fiqh literature forbidding the sale of debt, means
the exchange of two things both delayed or exchange of one delayed counter value for
another delayed counter value. The practice of Bai‘ al-K ¯ali bil K ¯ali was prevalent among
the pre-Islamic Arabs and was also termed Bai‘ al-Dayn bid-Dayn. What is prohibited by
this contract is the purchase by a man of a commodity on credit for a fixed period, and,
when the period of payment comes and he finds he is not able to pay the debt, he says: “Sell
it to me on credit for a further period, for something additional”. The Prophet is reported
to have prohibited such a sale. This principle has near universal application and has earned
canonical authority in Islamic law as Ijma‘a or consensus.
The best example of this practice in the present age is “rollover” in Murabaha, where the
banks, in a case of default on the Murabaha receivable, enter into another Murabaha for
giving more time to the client and thus charge more on their receivables. All Shar ¯ı´ah boards
and Shar¯ı´ah scholars prohibit this practice and any return on this account is not considered
legitimate income for Islamic banks.
In the early 1980s, banks in Pakistan were allowed to purchase trade bills, considering
the same as a Murabaha contract. But the Council of Islamic Ideology and the Shar ¯ı´ah
Courts in Pakistan disapproved of such transactions. Islamic banks should not trade in such
securities and debts for the basic reason that debts/debt instruments are not saleable at a
premium or discount.
However, a debt can be assigned or transferred on the basis of “Hawalah”, which implies
the transfer of debt obligation from the originator to a third party. 76 The difference between
the “sale of debt”, which is prohibited, and the “assignment of debt”, which is permissible,
is that in the latter, there is recourse to the assignor or the original debtor if the assignee
does not pay the debt for any reason.
The sale of certificates, or Sukuk, is an important area in this regard. As already indicated,
an object of sale in the Islamic law of contracts must be a property of value. When a
share or certificate is supported by an asset, as evidenced via the securitization process, it
is transformed into an object of value and therefore qualifies to become an object of trade,
whereby it can be purchased and sold in both the primary and secondary markets subject to
the condition that a return on it is based on cash flow from the asset backing the instrument.
Investors do have the right to sell such instruments.
Semi-debt instruments like leasing contracts resemble debt in the sense that they obligate
the user to a certain specific commitment (rent). Such contracts can be traded under certain
conditions since such trading represents the sale of leased assets, which can be conducted
on negotiated prices.
6.11 AL ‘INAH SALE AND THE USE OF RUSES (HIYAL)
Fiqh literature contains mention of a number of legal ruses that people have used to circum-
vent the prohibition of Riba. Fat ¯awa Alamgiri, Mahmas ¯ani’s Falsafa al Tashri, Sh ¯atbi’s al
76 Tirmidhi, 1988, No. 1331, pp. 30, 31; Muslim, 1981, 10, pp. 227, 228.


----- p.148 (pdf 176) -----


148 Understanding Islamic Finance
Mowafaq¯at, etc. contain reference to many techniques that people used to make transactions
technically permissible. 77
Joseph Schacht has undertaken extensive work in modern times on the subject of Hiyal.
By elucidating types of Hiyal and commenting on works by Shaybani and Khassaf, of the
Hanafi Fiqh, and Qazwini, a Shafi‘e jurist, Schacht relates a part of Hiyal to casuistry
practices that could mislead the people. Study of a vast literature in this regard would reveal
that the legality of Hiyal refers to some procedural devices advising people to be careful in
making contracts and framing legal statements. The purpose would be to avoid clashes with
the law and not to avoid the law. Accordingly, Hiyal, to the extent that they are acceptable,
are precautionary devices and a counterpart of Shariat literature. 78
Mahmasani narrates the following bases for the prohibition of Hiyal:
“First – the Shar ¯ı´ah texts are not aimed at the deeds themselves but rather at the interest which
those deeds are intended to serve. Therefore, all acts should be interpreted in the light of their
spirit and intent and not by their appearances /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiSecond – attempts at bypassing the law are
tantamount to deceit, and deceit is prohibited in Shar ¯ı´ah as evidenced by the Qur’ ¯an and the
Sunnah /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiThird – the Prophet, the Companions and the Followers have been quoted in opposition
to legal fictions /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiIbn Masud and Ibn Abbas, following the example of the Prophet, were reported
to have ruled against acceptance of a gift from the debtor before settlement of the debt, because
the purpose of a gift under such circumstances was the postponement of payment of the debt and
a ruse to legalize interest. Similarly, Muslim jurists, their followers and the doctors of traditions
such as Imam Bukhari agreed on the prohibition of legal fictions and on the necessity of avoiding
them”.79
According to Mahmasani, ruses or subterfuges are against the Shari’i spirit and are not
permissible. The Shafi‘e, Malikis and Hanbalis have declared the use of Hiyal as haram
and totally prohibited, while according to Hanafis, only such Hiyal are permissible as are
compatible with the spirit of the Shar ¯ı´ah. An example of a permissible Shari’i Hilah is that
a borrower may sell something to a lender at a price which is less than its actual price,
or the borrower may purchase something from the lender at a price higher than its actual
price.80 The purchaser can use the commodity himself or sell it in the market to get cash for
other needs. However, this is the practice of real purchase and sale (termed Tawarruq) and
different from Bai‘ al ‘Inah that involves buy-back and that has been prohibited by the holy
Prophet.
In Fat ¯awa Alamgiri (Hanafi Fiqh), a Hilah in terms of which a ruser sells a commodity of
$1000 payable after a year and then buys the same commodity for $950 on cash payment,
has been declared unlawful due to the involvement of the element of Riba. This practice
is known as Bai‘ al ‘Inah, defined as a double sale involving “buy-back”, by which the
borrower and the lender sell and then resell a commodity between them, once for cash and
once for a higher price on credit, with the net result of a loan with interest.
Jurists consider ‘Inah a stratagem whose function is to attain illegal ends through legal
means. Ibn Qudama says: “If a person sells something on credit, it is not permissible to buy
that commodity at a price less than the price at which he sold. Similarly, if a person sold
something for cash and then purchased on credit at higher than the sale price, it would not
77 Ali, n.d., 10, p. 355–364.
78 Schacht, 1964, pp. 81–84, 205–210.
79 Mahmasani, 1961, pp. 124, 125; for detail see pp. 119–126.
80 Mahmasani, 1961, p. 122.


----- p.149 (pdf 177) -----


Trading in Islamic Commercial Law 149
be permissible. However, if he purchases at a price less than he sold for cash, it would be
permissible”.81
Although some jurists, particularly Shawafi‘, allow ‘Inah in specific cases, 82 jurists in
general have prohibited it. Even the Shafi‘es do not give tacit approval for this. Saiful Azhar
Rosly and Mahmood M. Sanusi have concluded in a study: “We have argued therefore
in the above that the view of Imam Shafi‘e has reached a level which is similar to the
other Muslim schools, although the methodology which he adopted appears to be different
as he considered that when the legal preconditions of the contract are fulfilled, it cannot
be cancelled on the account of the intention of the parties. Likewise, this study finds no
significant Shar¯ı´ah justification of Bai‘ al ‘Inah.” 83
On this basis, the Shar ¯ı´ah committee of Al Baraka has not approved the purchasing of
a commodity by a company on credit for $20 and then selling it for cash for $15 to a
sister company (holding company) on account of this being Bai‘ al ‘Inah. 84 This means
that actually, the commodity has been purchased back by the same seller who undertakes a
transaction only to get interest. However, if one of the two companies is not fully owned by
the owner of the first company, this would not amount to Bai‘ al ‘Inah, as the commodity has
not been sold only to the first seller but also to others. This would be permissible provided
there was not any manipulation to circumvent the Riba prohibition.
In fact, in most such cases, no handing over or possession takes place, as had been the
case in buy-back-based mark-up operations in the NIB system in Pakistan adopted in the
1980s that were declared non-Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant by the Shar ¯ı´ah Courts.
Another form of ‘Inah is where one person asks another: “Buy for me (from a third party)
such and such an object for ten dinars in cash, and I will buy it from you for 12 dinars on
credit.”85 This transaction does not necessarily constitute Riba so long as the parties engage
in normal trade and ownership is actually transferred. However, Maliki jurists prohibit it
on the grounds of blocking the means (to an illicit end) (Sadd al-Zar ¯ai‘). Ibn Taymiyah,
a Hanbali jurist, in this respect says: “And if the person who requests [that the other buy
an object for cash and sell it to him on credit with an increase] aims [by concluding this
transaction] at obtaining dirhams (money) against a greater quantity of dirhams at term, and
the seller also aims at the same thing, then this is Riba, and there is no doubt as to its
prohibition, no matter how it is arrived at. Indeed actions are to be judged by intentions, and
each person has his intention”.
Ibn Taymiyah goes on to divide ‘Inah sales into three groups according to the buyer’s
intention:
1. He buys the goods (on credit) in order to use them, such as food, drink and the like, in
which case this is sale, which God has permitted.
2. He buys the goods in order to trade with them; this is trade, which God has permitted.
3. He buys the goods to get dirhams, which he needs, and it was difficult for him to borrow
or sell something on a Salam contract (immediate payment for future delivery), so he
81 Ibn Qudama, 1367 AH, 4, pp. 174–177.
82 See Nawavi in his annotation of Sahih Muslim , 1981, 6,p .2 1 .
83 Rosly and Sanusi, 1999.
84 Al Baraka, 1997, p. 128.
85 cf. Ray, 1995, p. 56.


----- p.150 (pdf 178) -----


150 Understanding Islamic Finance
buys a good in order to sell it and take its price. This, then, is Tawarruq (a form of ‘Inah),
which is Makrooh (reprehensible) according to the most eminent of the jurists. 86
Another variant of sale and repurchase transactions is when a person sells his house and
takes the price, but then, for example, the purchaser promises that whenever he gives the
price back, the latter will resell the house to him. This is a ruse permitted by Hanafi jurists
subject to certain conditions. Such an arrangement, termed Bai‘ bil Wafa in the Hanafi Fiqh,
basically treats the sold asset as collateral until the amount is paid back by the other party
to the sale. In this arrangement, a person sells his house and takes the payment; the buyer
promises to the seller that whenever the latter gives him back the price of the house, he will
resell the house to him. The Hanafi jurists have opined that if the resale of the house to the
original seller is made a condition for the initial sale, it is not allowed. However, if the first
sale is executed without any condition, but after effecting the sale, the buyer promises to
resell the house whenever the seller offers to him the same price, this promise is acceptable
and it creates not only a moral obligation, but also an enforceable right of the original seller.
Even if the promise has been made before effecting the first sale, after which the sale has
been effected without a condition, it is allowed by certain Hanafi jurists. 87
On the basis of the above, some forms of repurchase promises have been allowed by the
Shar¯ı´ah scholars, and Islamic banks provide housing finance through the arrangement of
Diminishing Musharakah. Banks purchase a part of the ownership of the client in a plot
of land/house and the client promises to repurchase the same after the lapse of a period
in which its market value changes, generally one year. The period of one year has been
suggested by scholars so that the transaction might not enter into the prohibited category of
Bai‘ al ‘Inah or a sale and buy-back arrangement. 88
6.12 OPTIONS IN SALES (KHIYAR)
The Shar¯ı´ah demands that the seller should disclose all the defects in the article being sold.
Otherwise the sale is not valid. When a person has made a purchase and was not aware, at
the time of sale or previously, of a defect in the article bought, he has an option, whether
the defect is small or big, and he may either be content with it at the agreed price or reject
it. If a seller has sold an asset as being possessed of some specific quality, and that asset
turns out to be without that quality, the buyer has an option to annul the contract. It is to
be recognized, however, that the right to exercise an option is not automatic. It has to be
specified at the time of entering into the contract. This brings us to another extraordinary
peculiarity of Islamic law: the doctrine of option or the right of cancellation (Khiyar).
Even when a sale is duly executed, free from any grounds of illegality, it still may not
be absolutely binding on the parties involved if the condition of option is provided in the
contract (Khiyar al-Shart). 89 So long as the parties do not leave the place of contract, any of
them can cancel the deal (Khiyar al-Majlis). However, if it is stipulated that the contract has
been finalized even if the parties do not separate, Khiyar al-Majlis will not be available. 90
86 Ibn Taymiyah, fat ¯awa, 440/29, 431/29; cf. Ray, 1995, pp. 56, 57.
87 Usmani, 2000a, p. 88 with reference from Jami’ul-Fusoolain 2, p. 237 and Radd al-Muhtar, 4, p. 135.
88 Usmani, 2000a, pp. 82–92.
89 Al Jaziri, 1973, pp. 339, 340, 357–362; Tirmidhi, 1988, Nos 1268, 1269, pp. 13–15, 16.
90 Al Jaziri, 1973, pp. 343–345.


----- p.151 (pdf 179) -----


Trading in Islamic Commercial Law 151
This concept of option is entirely different from the “options” that are simply the rights
sold/bought in the conventional derivatives markets. Such transactions do not fulfil the
conditions required for a valid sale. We shall discuss options and other derivatives in detail
in Chapter 8.
The Shar ¯ı´ah literature discusses the concept of option in trade wherefrom we conclude
that the informationally disadvantaged party at the time of entering into the contract can
have the option to cancel the contract within a specified period. The Prophet (pbuh) himself
recommended to one of his Companions to reserve an option for three days in all his
purchases. Jurists are unanimous on the validity of this kind of option. However, they differ
on options for more than three days. 91 Such option stipulation can be reserved by either of
the parties.
Aside from this, the purchaser has an option without any stipulation with regard to things
he has purchased without seeing, and also on account of defects in the commodity being
sold. The greatest of all defects is the lack of a title or of the right to sell on the part of the
seller. The parties can also agree that if payment is not made within three days, the contract
will be annulled. This is called an option of payment (Khiyar-e-Naqad). This sale would be
valid only if payment was made within the specified number of days. 92
The following five types of options among various forms discussed in Fiqh books are
important:
• Khiyar al-Shart: a stipulation that any of the parties has the option to rescind the sale
within so many (specified) days; this is also termed Bai‘ al Khiyar.
• Khiyar al Ro’yat: an option to be exercised on inspecting the goods – goods, if not
according to the contract, can be returned after inspection if such an option has been
provided for in the sale agreement.
• Khiyar al ‘Aib: an option with regard to defect – goods can be returned if found to be
defective; this kind of option is available even if no such condition is stipulated in the
contract if the defect was not brought to the notice of the buyer at the time of the contract
and the defect caused a visible decrease in the value of the sold commodity. 93 However,
if the seller declares at the time of the contract that he will not be held responsible for
any defect in the commodity, the contract is valid according to Hanafis. 94
• Khiyar al Wasf: the option of quality – where goods are sold by specified quality, but
that quality is absent, the goods can be returned.
• Khiyar-e-Ghaban: the option relating to price – where goods are sold at a price far higher
than the market price, and the client is told or given the impression that he has been
charged the market price.
As regards the Khiyar al Ro’yat, jurists differ as to whether the sale of unseen items is
binding or not. 95 Ibn Hazm contends that if a person purchases an unseen commodity but the
seller has sufficiently described its features and the commodity conforms to those features,
91 Al Jaziri, 1973, p. 358.
92 Al Jaziri, 1973, pp. 358, 359.
93 Al Jaziri, 1973, pp. 381–383.
94 Al Jaziri, 1973, p. 395.
95 Ibn Hazm, 1988, 7, pp. 214, 215.


----- p.152 (pdf 180) -----


152 Understanding Islamic Finance
it would be unjust not to purchase the commodity by using Khiyar al Ro’yat. 96 Shaikh Al
Dhareer writes in this regard:
“The Hanafis and the Shafi’is have held in one view that the sale is not binding on the buyer.
Upon viewing, he can revoke it or ratify it. It means that he has the option of (rejecting) upon
seeing the object even if it is found to be consistent with the manner described; for not seeing the
object obstructs the completion of the transaction. Since this sale is known as the sale with the
option of seeing, it must include such option. The Malikis and the Shafi’is have held, in one of
their views, and so did the Hanbalis, that the sale is binding on the buyer should he find the object
corresponding to the way earlier described to him. But if he found it different, he has the option
either to ratify the sale or to revoke it. This is a manifestly cogent view”. 97
In Salam and Istisna‘a, Khiyar al Ro’yat is not available if the goods are according to the
specifications already stipulated.
In the case of Murabaha to Purchase Orderer, the client would have the options of defect
and specification/quality. If the assets or the goods required by the client are not according
to the stipulated specification or have any material defect, the client will have the right not
to purchase the goods as per his promise, and if Murabaha is executed, he will have the
right to rescind the sale unless the bank gets a certificate of fitness just at the time of the
sale after giving the client sufficient opportunity to examine the asset.
6.13 SUMMARY
A valid sale contract must fulfil the following requirements.
1. The parties must enter into the contract voluntarily with full/free consent.
2. Both parties must be fully competent – intellectually sound adults.
3. The subject of the sale must be a property of value acceptable in Shar ¯ı´ah – it must be
pure, lawful (Mub ¯ah), clean, wholesome and, of course, marketable and having legal and
commercial value. From the Shar ¯ı´ah perspective, its underlying cause must be lawful
and it must not be proscribed by Islamic law nor a nuisance to public order or morality.
4. The seller must be the owner of the object being sold, or he must be authorized to sell
by dint of contracts like partnership, agency or guardianship (of a minor).
5. The seller must be in a position to deliver the goods.
6. Both parties must take cognizance of the object of the sale by examining or by adequate
description.
7. The price must be precisely determined and known to the parties at finalization of the
contract.
8. All permissible goods can be purchased/sold on credit in exchange for cash – the counter
values not being homogenous. This means that all goods that are not of the Thaman
kind can be sold for currency on credit.
9. The credit price of a commodity can be more than its cash-n-carry price. But the price
must be precisely determined when the sale contract is completed. In the case of late
payment by the debtor in a credit sale, the seller cannot get any compensation from the
buyer.
96 Ibn Hazm, 1988, 7, p. 216.
97 Al-Dhareer, 1997, p. 33 (quoting from Al-Bada’i, 5/392; Al-Muhazzab, I/263; Al-Muntaqa or Al-Muwatta, 4/287).


----- p.153 (pdf 181) -----


Trading in Islamic Commercial Law 153
10. Money cannot be traded as a commodity and financial transactions must be supported
by genuine trade or business-related activities.
This chapter has also discussed elements of Gharar and the prohibited sales due to the
involvement of Gharar and Riba. The Shar ¯ı´ah position of Hiyal (legal ruses) and Bai‘ al
‘Inah have been discussed to describe the possible limits within which products can be
developed by Islamic banks. The concept of option (Khiyar) and its relevance to the Islamic
banking business has also been discussed in some detail.


----- p.154 (pdf 182) -----




