
----- p.179 (pdf 207) -----


8
Overview of Financial Institutions
and Products: Conventional and Islamic
8.1 INTRODUCTION
To understand the concepts and operations of Islamic finance, it is worthwhile giving an
overview of the financial institutions, markets and instruments in the conventional set-up, as
well as in the Islamic framework. This will help in understanding how financial institutions
and products affect individuals, firms, societies, economies and States and how they perform
to fulfil the needs of various segments in an economy.
In this chapter, we shall briefly indicate the alternatives in Islamic finance to their counter-
parts in conventional finance. Details of these alternatives are given in subsequent chapters
and readers may like to refer to the relevant chapters for conceptual and practical explana-
tions.
8.2 WHAT IS BANKING OR A BANK?
Banking is a key subsector in the economic field. The word “bank” is said to have been
derived from the Italian word “banco”, meaning shelf or bench, on which the ancient money
changers used to display their coins. The bench of a medieval banker or money changer
was broken by the people if he failed in business and this probably is the origin of the word
“bankrupt”.1
A bank is an institution authorized to take deposits for the purpose of extending long-
and short-term finance facilities. Study of the history of finance reveals that the practice of
banking has existed in one form or another dating back to 575 BC. People used to deposit
their money in temple treasuries. These temples used to act as banks and extend finance to
individuals and the State. Over time, such operations moved from religious institutions to
private banks. The Igibi bank of Babylon, which existed in 575 BC, not only acted as an
agent for clients, extending finance on the basis of signatures, but also accepted deposits
and gave loans for agriculture.
The practice of goldsmiths in medieval England initially involved accepting deposits
of gold coins and issuing receipts to depositors. For their convenience, depositors started
using these receipts for the settlement of their liabilities. As these receipts established their
legitimacy, depositors started making less frequent visits to the money lenders. This provided
money lenders with an opportunity to extend the money lying with them to the needy on the
basis of interest, while keeping a certain reserve ratio to meet the demand for withdrawals.
1 Muslehuddin, 1993, p. 5, cf. Encyclopedia of Banking and Finance , Boston, 1962; also see the relevant text in Encyclopedia
Britannica.


----- p.180 (pdf 208) -----


180 Understanding Islamic Finance
In its modern form, a bank is an establishment for the custody of money received from,
or on behalf of, its customers, whose drafts it has to honour and pay. The pooled money
is used by it for the purpose of making advances to others to get a return in the form of
interest, dividends or others.
Traditionally, modern banking is divided into two main categories: commercial and invest-
ment banking. Commercial banking involves intermediation between depositors and fund
users, and making payments on behalf of their clients. On the other hand, investment bank-
ing primarily comprises capital market activities for facilitating fundraising by the corporate
sector, directly or indirectly from the investors. In the USA, the 1933 Glass–Steagall Act
enforced tight regulations on the banking industry, separating the practices of commercial
and investment banking. This separation was achieved in Japan by law after World War II. In
the UK, this separation prevailed because of institutional history rather than any regulation.
While the financial world in past decades was clearly divided between commercial and
investment banking, banks have, over time, adopted the German-style banking model, per-
forming different functions simultaneously. Further, investment banking has become an
important function of the commercial banks as well. The amendment of the London Stock
Exchange regulations in 1986 eroded the distinction between commercial and investment
banking in the UK. In the US, the Glass–Steagall Act was repealed in 1999, as a result
of which a large number of banks started operations in the capital market and securities
trading, many of them providing investment services to Muslim investors. A different and
new development is emerging in the shape of Islamic banking within the banking industry
in a large number of countries.
8.3 THE STRATEGIC POSITION OF BANKS AND FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS
Finance is the most strategic part of modern economics that functions like blood arteries
in the human body. In every society there are surplus as well as deficit households and
institutions. While a large number of people have relatively smaller savings, a number of
others, particularly businesses, are short of funds for their business expenses or production
needs. Financial institutions provide a link between the deficit and the surplus units. In a
conventional set-up, individuals and households provide funds to business and industries
through financial institutions, which charge a fixed or floating but risk-free rate of return
from the fund users and give a part of the return to the fund owners (savers/investors),
keeping the remainder for themselves as spread.
Like all other goods and services, the availability of the funds is governed by the forces
of demand and supply and the risk profiles of various stakeholders. While the supply of
funds comes from individuals or households and corporate bodies, demand is generated in
trade, business, industry, agriculture, corporations and government sectors. The institutions
involved in this process of resources transfer are commercial banks, investment banks, sav-
ings and loan institutions, specialized institutions like micro credit, SME credit, industry,
agriculture, trade, export/import, housing, leasing, venture capital, discount houses, insur-
ance companies, fund management companies, asset management companies, etc. These
institutions can be divided from one angle into two broad categories of banks and non-
bank financial companies or institutions (NBFIs). Further, there are some development


----- p.181 (pdf 209) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 181
finance institutions (DFIs) operating both as banking and non-banking institutions and pro-
viding finance to industry, agriculture and other sectors or subsectors for developmental
activities.
Commercial banks undertake the intermediation function between the saving surplus and
the fund user units and entities and provide checking facilities to the savers/investors. NBFIs
normally do not provide checking facilities to the savers and facilitate the raising of funds for
business and industry directly from the saving surplus units/households. Investment banks
are included in the NBFIs. Investment banks derive their income primarily from fee-based
activities or profits from trading in securities rather than from a margin between the borrowing
and lending costs. The services provided by these banks take many forms, including securities
underwriting, stock and bond trading, facilitating mergers and acquisitions, arranging and
funding syndicated loans and providing financial advice to companies needing funds.
The above types of institution are regulated by central banks or monetary authorities
and the securities and exchange commissions in respective countries. Regulators’ objectives
everywhere are said to be efficiency in mobilizing resources from the surplus units and
optimum allocation of these resources along with stability of prices, payment systems and
the economy as a whole. In addition, there are some international financial institutions
that coordinate the services of banks and financial institutions at a global level. The most
important of these institutions is the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), which performs
the function of coordination and standardization of the services of the financial institutions
in various parts of the world.
8.4 CATEGORIES OF CONVENTIONAL FINANCIAL BUSINESS
8.4.1 Commercial Banking
The main functions of a modern commercial bank include receiving deposits of various
natures, granting short- and medium-term loans by way of overdrafts, discounting of bills
and commercial papers, advances against securities for business and households, long-term
mortgage financing and investments in capital markets. In some markets, commercial banks
are also undertaking merchant banking. All this fund-based business is conducted on the
basis of interest that is charged from the fund users and paid to the depositors/investors.
Commercial banks also deal in foreign currencies, money changing and perform a number
of services like issuing letters of credit (L/C) and letters of guarantee (L/G), payments
made/received on behalf of their clients, safe custody of valuables and a number of advisory
services against service charges or commission.
However, all commercial banks might not be undertaking all of the above functions,
and the majority of them undertake the business of deposit-taking with an open checking
facility and lending for short periods for providing running finance to business and industry.
Medium- and long-term financing is mostly arranged by investment banks by way of direct
intermediation between the investors and industry/business.
The Deposits/Liability Side of Commercial Banks
All deposits in conventional commercial banks are the liability of the banks, because the
amount of deposits has to be paid back with or without a return. Current accounts that
are normally maintained by the business and corporate sectors carry no return and are


----- p.182 (pdf 210) -----


182 Understanding Islamic Finance
used for managing their cash flow. Savings, term, notice deposits and certificates of
investment/certificates of deposit (COIs/CODs) are remunerative deposits for the short,
medium and long term. A brief explanation of the deposits side of banks follows.
Current Accounts
These are a basic type of account maintained mainly by corporate clients and by individ-
uals for availing credit facilities from the banks/financial institutions. As indicated above,
normally such accounts are nonremunerative; however, many regulators allow payment of
interest on such accounts and some banks give a little return as a part of their marketing
strategy. Hence, a current account in the conventional system may or may not be remuner-
ative.
Savings Accounts
These are the normal checking accounts that commercial banks offer for fund mobilization
against the payment of interest; savings accounts may have a minimum balance requirement.
Different types of savings accounts offer different interest rates depending on the deposit
amount. The concept of daily product is used for the entitlement of return to various
depositors. Saving deposits, and to some extent term deposits, are collectively known as
“demand” deposits, because one can, at any time, draw the amount without any notice.
Fixed-term Accounts/Certificates of Investment/Certificates of Deposit
In term deposit accounts (as captioned above), the deposit holder agrees to lock in the money
for a fixed period of time while the bank commits to pay an indicated interest rate depending
on the term of the deposit – the longer the term, the higher the interest rate. Some banks
charge a penalty in the event of premature encashment – some banks charge a prespecified
penalty over the remaining period of deposit, while others use the period for which money
has been with the bank. In financial markets with open competition, the return already given
is adjusted in the case of early withdrawal, keeping in mind the investment and the remaining
periods.
Term deposit receipts (TDRs) are issued at par or discounted value. A typical TDR issued
at discount is issued at a value below its par; it grows up to the par value in the agreed
timeframe. TDRs may have a life ranging from an overnight deposit to five/six/seven years,
though by custom, it varies from seven days to five years. This type of deposit is also called
a certificate of investment (COI) by investment banks and NBFIs. A typical COI is issued
at its par value with return payment made at agreed intervals ranging from one month to the
time of maturity.
Annuities/Perpetuities
Annuities are normally built on savings accounts for commercial banks. NBFIs use COIs to
offer annuities. The depositor is entitled to withdraw the amount after the deposit period.
However, frequently the annuity converts itself into a perpetuity at maturity, i.e. the deposit
holder is allowed to withdraw an agreed amount indefinitely at an agreed timeframe. These
products are also offered by life insurance companies. Products of such a nature exist in
the mutual fund industry and share markets as well, and are called “dividend reinvestment
plans.”


----- p.183 (pdf 211) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 183
Advance Profit-paying Products
In these types of product, the anticipated amount of profit is discounted and paid up front.
In essence, this is similar to a term deposit receipt issued at discount.
Cash Management/Fund Management Accounts
Historically, the NBFIs, and particularly the investment banks, used to maintain cash
management accounts. But over the last decade, commercial banks have also been increas-
ingly offering discretionary or nondiscretionary cash management and fund management
accounts. A typical CMA entails the deposit of money with the bank for an agreed period
that carries either a fixed rate of return or any rate linked with any other activity in capital
markets. In the case of nondiscretionary accounts, the client instructs the bank about the
type of investment as well. In most such cases in conventional banking, a fixed amount of
return is paid. In rare cases, funds are invested on the basis of a fee, remitting all profit to
the depositors.
The Assets Side of Commercial Banks
Commercial banks deploy depositors’ funds for short-term (a year or less than one year),
medium-term (one to three years) and long-term (over five years) loans and advances on
the basis of interest. A prudent banker is supposed to take into consideration the character
and business integrity of the borrower, his cash flow and capacity to repay, the purpose of
borrowing and the security offered as collateral. The following are the possible forms of
loans:
1. Productive loans: for trade, industry and other businesses and in most cases also for
housing.
2. Consumption and consumer durable loans: for household goods, automobiles, etc.
3. Clean advances: on the personal surety of the borrower or of any third party, no collateral.
4. Discounting of commercial papers like notes, bills of exchange, etc.
5. Cash credit like overdrafts: customers are allowed to draw from a limit given by the bank.
The financing operations of commercial banks for various purposes in respect of industry
and commerce are briefly given below:
• Working capital finance: the working capital requirement of various sectors is met by
banks through grants of cash credit, overdraft facilities, demand loans, opening of L/Cs
and through discounting of bills of exchange.
• Trade financing normally involves the issuance of L/Cs by commercial banks. Sight L/Cs
are simply fee-based instruments issued to facilitate trade while usance L/Cs also involve
financing by banks against payment of interest.
• L/Gs are issued by banks to ensure, on behalf of their clients, that the payment will be
made when due or action taken as and when required in the contracts in the background.
Thus, the bank acts as guarantor of the client’s liability towards the counterparty. Banks
get commission for issuing L/Gs, but if they are required to perform the guarantee, they
have to pay the related amount for which they charge interest.
• Agricultural finance: commercial banks provide production and developmental loans to
farmers. Short-term finance is required by farmers mainly for the purchase of seed,
fertilizer and pesticides, while medium- and long-term finance is needed for land-levelling,


----- p.184 (pdf 212) -----


184 Understanding Islamic Finance
tubewells, tractors, setting up of poultry/dairy/fish farms and construction of storage
facilities.
• Fixed investment finance: this is provided by way of term loans or purchase of debentures
or participation in underwriting and “bridge financing” arrangements.
• Treasury products – liquidity and fund management: this involves money and capi-
tal market operations, foreign exchange operations, inter-bank borrowing and lending
money on interest linked to tenor, credit considerations and liquidity amongst other fac-
tors. Treasury products are used to manage mismatches in liquidity position and to get
returns. The entire activity is based on interest receipts or payments. Repo and reverse
repo operations involve selling/purchasing and entering into a back to back transac-
tion for purchasing/selling. The objective is to manage liquidity and enhance interest
income.
• Nostro accounts, maintained by banks overseas to undertake trade finance activity and
correspondent banking. Interest is paid and received on the balances maintained and the
amounts overdrawn.
8.4.2 Investment Banking
Investment banks facilitate the direct flow of funds from the surplus to the deficit units
in an economy. They help business firms – private and public companies – and gov-
ernments in need of funds in selling their debt or equity securities in the primary
financial markets and also play in the secondary markets as brokers and dealers. They
derive their income primarily from fee-based activities or profits from trading securi-
ties rather than from a margin between borrowing and lending costs. The services pro-
vided by investment banks take many forms, including securities underwriting, stock
and bond trading, facilitating mergers and acquisitions, arranging and funding syndi-
cated loans, providing financial advice to companies on aspects like pricing of securi-
ties, etc.
For small and start-up companies in particular, investment banks facilitate mobilization
of funds from venture capitalists. General investors are not interested in small and start-up
companies and their capital needs at this stage are met through venture capital financing.
Investment banks facilitate them by managing funds from the venture capitalists through
private placements (issuers sell the securities directly to the ultimate investors). However,
their most important job is facilitating initial public offerings (IPOs), that is the first sale
of stocks by a company to the public. Companies go for IPOs to enhance their ability to
raise funds. After IPO, investment banks serve as brokers, arbitrageurs and provide various
corporate advisory services. 2
Conventional investment banks normally raise medium- and long-term funds through
closed- and open-ended funds, by issuance of COIs/CODs and offering guaranteed div-
idend accounts without checking facilities. COI holders get pre-agreed interest income.
A dividend at a certain rate is guaranteed by the account-maintaining institutions
during the period of deposit. In some cases the account holder is given a mini-
mum guaranteed return, generally below the market rate, whereas the upside is kept
open.
2 For details about the functions of modern investment banks, see http://islamiccenter.kau.edu.sa/english/publications/Obaidullah/ifs/ifs.
html; Obaidullah, n.d., pp. 146–150.


----- p.185 (pdf 213) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 185
8.4.3 Other NBFIs
Non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs) other than investment banks are discount houses,
leasing companies, venture capital companies, asset management and fund management
companies, insurance companies and other specialized institutions for financing various
sectors in an economy. Their activities also pertain to facilitating business and industry
through direct intermediation between savers and investors and money and capital market
transactions. The investors get interest or a guaranteed dividend while the fund users have
to pay interest. Some NBFIs deal in real estate and manage property and other funds to get
fixed and variable returns in the form of interest or dividends.
8.4.4 Conventional Financial Markets
Financial markets facilitate the management of liquidity for investors. When the holder of
the security needs cash, he can sell the security to a third party via the financial markets. The
purchaser then steps into the shoes of the previous holder and becomes entitled to receive
the amount.
Financial markets in the conventional framework comprise money and capital markets.
While the money market is based on receipts and payments of interest on short-term lend-
ing and borrowing and trading in short-term debt instruments, the capital market involves
medium- and long-term debt and equity-based transactions. Foreign exchange markets are
considered part of the financial markets.
Financial markets are further distributed in the primary and secondary markets. Instru-
ments generated in the primary market are traded in the secondary market. More recently,
global depository receipts (GDRs) – negotiable certificates held in the bank of one country
representing a specific number of securities/shares of a stock traded on an exchange of
another country – are being traded in the developed financial markets.
A conventional bond stands for a loan repayable to the holder in any case, and mostly with
interest. It has nothing to do with the actual business undertaken with the borrowed money.
A typical debt market undertakes trading of securities like bonds, debentures, commercial
papers, treasury bills and derivatives in spot and future markets.
While debt instruments are entirely based on interest, many joint stock companies involve
interest one way or the other. Either their core business is related to interest or Gharar
or they lend or borrow on the basis of interest and undertake Gharar-based activities. The
basic concept of an equity market, commonly known as a stock market, is permissible under
Shar¯ı´ah provided the stocks being traded do not involve Riba and Gharar, for which the
experts have developed a number of criteria that we shall discuss in subsequent sections.
8.5 THE NEED FOR ISLAMIC BANKS AND NBFIS
Interest is the cornerstone of the modern financial system. Keeping in mind the strict
prohibition of interest in the Islamic framework, one may consider that an Islamic finance
and economic system may be developed without intermediaries like banks and financial
institutions, but this is a misconception. Banks and financial institutions will remain a part and
parcel of economics and finance in the Islamic framework as well. Modern businesses need
huge amounts of funds, while people at large have mostly small savings. This necessitates
the presence of such intermediary institutions through which business needs can be directly


----- p.186 (pdf 214) -----


186 Understanding Islamic Finance
and indirectly fulfilled with savers’ pooled money in such a way that savers/investors can
also get a just return on their investments and business and industry can get the funds
required for ensuring a sufficient supply of goods and services for the welfare of mankind.
Keeping in mind the role and functions of banks, based on intermediation between the
savers and the fund users, the need for banks has been endorsed by Islamic economists,
bankers and scholars. Al-Jarhi and Munawar Iqbal express this need in the following words:
“Financial intermediation enhances the efficiency of the saving/investment process by eliminating
the mismatches inherent in the requirements and availability of financial resources of savers and
entrepreneurs in an economy. Entrepreneurs may require funds for periods relatively longer than
would suit individual savers. Intermediaries resolve this mismatch of maturity and liquidity pref-
erences by pooling small funds. Moreover, the risk preferences of savers and entrepreneurs are
also different. It is often considered that small savers are risk averse and prefer safer placements
whereas entrepreneurs deploy funds in risky projects. The role of the intermediary again becomes
crucial. They can substantially reduce their own risks through the different techniques of proper risk
management. Furthermore, small savers cannot efficiently gather information about opportunities
to place their funds. Financial intermediaries are in a much better position to collect such informa-
tion, which is crucial for making a successful placement of funds. Hence, we do need banks. Unfor-
tunately, the banks’ role is marred by dealing on the basis of interest and limiting their activities
to mostly commercial operations, as pointed out above. Islamic banks add value on both counts”.3
8.5.1 The Structure of Islamic Banking
Islamic financial institutions (IFIs) also serve as intermediaries between the saving surplus
and the deficit units/households. However, the instrument of “interest” is replaced by a
number of instruments. While conventional banks mainly pay and charge interest in their
operations, Islamic financial institutions have to avoid interest and use more than one key
instrument as the basis of their intermediary activities. The striking difference is that risks
in Islamic banking remain with the ownership, as a result of which, IFIs share profit or
loss arising on investments and earn return on their trading and leasing activities by dint
of the risk and liability taken and adding value in real business activities. They mobilize
deposits on the basis of profit/loss sharing and to some extent on the basis of Wakalah
against pre-agreed service charges or agency fees.
On the assets side, they take the liability of loss, if any, in case of Musharakah/Mudarabah-
based financing and bear risk in trading activities so long as the assets remain in their
ownership. In leasing activities, they purchase the assets, give them on rental and bear
ownership-related risks and expenses. This implies that IFIs will remain as intermediaries,
as they collect savings from a large number of savers/investors for financing the needs
of business, agriculture and industry, but their modus operandi will change. Their subject
matter will be goods and real business activities.
The general outline of Islamic banking as we find in mainstream relevant literature and
as briefly depicted by M.N. Siddiqi is as follows: 4
“Commercial banks will be organized with share capital and will accept demand deposits and
investment accounts from the public. They will offer all the conventional banking services like safe
3 Jarhi and Munawar, 2001.
4 Siddiqi, 1983, pp. 94–96.


----- p.187 (pdf 215) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 187
keeping, transfers, etc. for a fee. Demand deposits may or may not involve any service charges
and they will not bring any return to the depositors. In return for the privilege of using demand
deposits in their normal operations, as is the case in the fractional reserve system, the banks will be
obliged to earmark part of these deposits for making short-term interest-free loans. Repayment of
these loans and safety of the demand deposits will have to be ensured by the Central Bank through
special arrangements.
Deposits in investment accounts may be for specific projects, or left to the discretion of the bank
for suitable investment. Investment of bank funds may take the form of partnership, the banks
actually participating in the management of the enterprise, or of profit-sharing advances leaving
management to the entrepreneur. Banks may also buy stocks or investment certificates to diversify
their portfolios. They may also resort to leasing arrangements covering such items as buildings,
ships, planes, industrial equipment, etc. Actual practice may bring in other innovations in the field
of profit-sharing investments. The depositors will share banks’ profits on a pro rata basis according
to agreed percentages.
There will be some provision for short-term interest-free loans to businesses, government and
consumers. But the dominant form of transaction in the system will be investment and not lending.
Additions to the supply of money will be largely contingent upon investments directed at creating
additional wealth. Though the system has a built-in tendency to prevent concentration of wealth
and power, the Central Bank as well as the State will guard against such a possibility and take
suitable steps to maintain a balance.”
Al-Jarhi and Munawar Iqbal have candidly described the operational set-up of an Islamic
bank in the following words:
“An Islamic bank is a deposit-taking banking institution whose scope of activities includes all
currently known banking activities, excluding borrowing and lending on the basis of interest. On
the liabilities side, it mobilizes funds on the basis of a Mudarabah or Wakalah (agency) contract.
It can also accept demand deposits, which are treated as interest-free loans from the clients to the
bank and which are guaranteed. On the assets side, it advances funds on a profit-and-loss sharing
or a debt-creating basis, in accordance with the principles of the Shar ¯ı´ah. It plays the role of an
investment manager for the owners of time deposits, usually called investment deposits. In addition,
equity holding as well as commodity and asset trading constitute an integral part of Islamic banking
operations. An Islamic bank shares its net earnings with its depositors in a way that depends on the
size and maturity of each deposit. Depositors must be informed beforehand of the formula used for
sharing the net earnings with the bank.”
They have identified the following approach to replace the institution of interest:
“As a rule, all financial arrangements that the parties agree to use are lawful, as long as they do not
violate Islamic principles. Islam does not stop at prohibiting interest. It provides several interest-
free modes of finance that can be used for different purposes. These modes can be placed into
two categories. The first category includes modes of advancing funds on a profit-and-loss sharing
basis. Examples of the first category are Mudarabah and Diminishing Musharakah with clients and
participation in the equity capital of companies. The second category includes modes that finance
the purchase/hire of goods (including assets) and services on a fixed-return basis. Examples of this
type are Murabaha, Istisna‘a, Salam and leasing”. 5
There are broadly three models of organizational structure that the banks can adopt,
according to their span of activities: the “Universal Banking Model”, the “Bonafide Sub-
sidiary Model” (all subsidiaries having their own capital and separate operations) and the
5 Jarhi and Munawar, 2001.


----- p.188 (pdf 216) -----


188 Understanding Islamic Finance
“Bank Holding Company Model” (a bank holds separate organizations owned by itself
for different activities, e.g. investment banking, Murabaha/trading transactions, commercial
banking, etc.). The first two models may not best suit Islamic banks because of the wide
difference in the nature of activities that they will have to adopt for their operations. 6 The
fully owned (by the parent bank) subsidiaries model is best suited to banks if they establish
a number of subsidiaries for various types of operations, namely investment banking, com-
modity trade-based banking, leasing-based banking, Istisna‘a-based banking and the normal
commercial banking. Alternatively, IFIs can have special branches for industry, agriculture,
commerce, real estate and Takaful businesses.
Both on the liabilities and assets sides, the risk profile will be determining the return/charge
and the nature of relationship between the savers, banks and fund users. Funds of risk-averse
depositors will be used for low-risk financing and vice versa. In certain cases, the banks may
also work as fund managers managing funds of investors/clients and charging commission
for their services. As trustees, they will manage the clients’ portfolios and the investors will
have flexibility in choosing the best way and place to invest, according to their priorities
and the risk profile.
The modes available to banks/their subsidiaries in order of priority will be
Musharakah/equity participation, Mudarabah or profit-sharing and loss-absorbing, Ijarah and
trading in real goods or sale contracts with deferred payment (Bai‘ Mu’ajjal) or with deferred
delivery of goods (Bai‘ Salam and Istisna‘a).
As the banks take deposits mostly from the middle class, they need to be very careful while
investing their funds to safeguard the interests of the depositors as well as the shareholders.
Therefore, depending upon the share of risk-averse deposits in their liabilities, they will have
to use Murabaha and other debt-creating modes to reduce the risk and Shirkah-based modes
for those who can take the risk of loss. Instruments for liquidity can be developed on the
basis of all above modes, subject to the condition that return thereon depends upon the level
of risk borne, entrepreneurship or real economic activity and involvement of real assets.
8.5.2 The Deposits Side of Islamic Banking
In the fast-developing world of finance, Islamic banks are obliged to innovate a set of
techniques to mobilize deposits, keeping in mind the priorities and risk preferences of various
categories of depositors. They will also have to cater for safeguarding the depositors from
loss on PLS deposits.
Recent developments on the deposits side reveal that Islamic banks, in addition to the
general categories of savings and investment deposits, have started offering commodity
funds, leasing funds, Murabaha funds and COIs. The funds thus mobilized are used in
lease or Murabaha operations, giving fees or fixed margins of profit to the banks. Thus,
savers are in a position to get a quasi-fixed return. However, this fixity of return may create
ambiguity with respect to their Shar ¯ı´ah position unless strict Shar ¯ı´ah controls are applied
to the operations and distribution of returns thus achieved. The majority of authors allow
third party guarantee to depositors to the extent of a nominal amount of deposits. However,
for enhancing confidence of the depositors and to avoid any scares or chaos, any Takaful
scheme for deposits would be desirable. This is because the provision of third party guarantee
6 Khan, 1999.


----- p.189 (pdf 217) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 189
has some objections, both from practical as well as Shar ¯ı´ah aspects. On the deposits side,
Islamic banks will provide the products discussed below.
Current Deposits
Generally, no return is given on current accounts on the grounds that such deposits take the
form of loans given to Islamic banks and the loans cannot carry any return. They are kept
as Am ¯anah; but if the proceeds of such accounts are used by banks in their business, they
are treated as loans that have to be paid back without any increase or decrease. Banks shall
guarantee the principal amount of deposits. Subject to agreement, banks may have the option
to use such accounts at their discretion in permissible business activities. The relationship
of debtor and creditor between the bank and the depositor will continue. The bank and the
depositor shall agree at the time of account opening whether the bank is allowed to use the
money in its business or not. There will be no need to develop and implement a weightage
system for this type of account.
However, some writers favour giving a gratis return even to current account holders. They
add that it can be only at the discretion of the banks and the depositors should not have
any entitlement. A further condition for such an incentive is that they should not be offered
regularly. This is because, with the passage of time, the practice will become customary
and, in turn, take on the ruling of benefits stipulated in a contract of deposit. 7
Savings Deposits/Investment Deposits/ Term Deposits
All remunerative deposits in Islamic banks, including saving deposits against which banks
provide a free checking facility, shall be accepted on a profit and loss sharing (PLS) basis.
The ratio of profit distribution between the bank and the depositor shall be agreed at the
time of account opening subject to the condition of the Shar ¯ı´ah that a partner may agree
on a ratio of profit which is different from the ratio of capital but losses have to be shared
strictly in the ratio of capital.
Investments/financing made by banks from their own capital and from the monies raised
from PLS accounts shall form the “earning asset base”, the returns from which shall be
allocated between the banks and their account holders in the agreed ratio. Deposits of
longer duration shall be compensated through assignment of higher weightages. Regulators
may notify a range within which these allocations could be made. Alternatively, such
assignment of weights may be left at the discretion of the banks. The following are the other
considerations in this regard:
• Deposits of the risk-averse clients will be accepted either in current accounts as interest-
free loans that will be guaranteed with no share in return from financing operations of the
banks or by creating special pools or establishing Murabaha and leasing funds, wherein
they will be treated as Rabbul-m ¯al and get the quasi-fixed return out of profits or rentals
earned by the respective funds.
• Risk-prone deposits will become part of the bank’s equity, involving a weightage system
(the longer the maturity, the higher the weight) on a daily product basis (DPB).
7 Institute of Islamic Banking and Insurance (IIBI), 2000, pp. 137–138.


----- p.190 (pdf 218) -----


190 Understanding Islamic Finance
• Specific investment accounts can be managed as per savers’ instructions on a Mudarabah or
Wakalah basis. Banks can float equity funds on the principle of Mudarabah against a share in
the actual profits. However, there may also be an agency relationship, wherein the bank would
be managing depositors’ funds against pre-agreed fees and passing on the profit/loss to the
depositors.
• Banks may establish closed/open-ended mutual funds.
• Inter-bank financing will also become part of the equity of the bank, using appropriate
weightage and DPB to calculate profit.
Box 8.1: Deposit Management in Islamic Banks on Mudarabah Basis
Most of the Islamic banks are following a profit-sharing mechanism called the
Mudarabah + Musharakah model or simply the Mudarabah model. Step by step, the
process flow of the Mudarabah model is as follows:
The bank will create an investment pool having categories based on different
tenors of deposits. We assume that the bank launches the following deposit tenors:
three months, six months and one year. Each depositor of the bank will deposit
its funds in a specific category of the investment pool that will be assigned a spe-
cific weightage. Weightage can only be amended at the beginning of the account-
ing period. Assume that the following investment is made by the depositors in
pool A.
Category Amount in $ Weightage
Three months 3000 0.60
Six months 4000 0.70
One year 3000 1.00
All members of the pool will have a Musharakah relationship with each other, i.e.
they are partners in the pool with the above mentioned weightages. The bank may
also invest in the pool as a depositor.
Now the pool, in its collective capacity, enters into a Mudarabah contract. Under
the agreement, pool A would act as Rabbul-m ¯al and the bank would be Mudarib. The
bank would undertake business with funds from the pool and the profit earned would
be shared between the parties in an agreed ratio. Assume that the profit sharing ratio
is 50:50.
The bank deploys $10 000 of the pool for a period of one month and earns a profit
of $1000 at the end of the month. This profit would be shared as follows: bank (500)
and the pool (500). The Mudarabah contract would be completed at this stage.
Profit-sharing Among the Pool Members
$500 earned by the pool would be distributed as per the weightage assigned at the
beginning of the month. The relationship within the pool would be governed by the
rules of Musharakah.


----- p.191 (pdf 219) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 191
Deposit ($) Weightage Weighted average Profit Rate
(A) (B) (C = A∗B) (D 1)( E 2)
3000 0.6 1800 119 3.96 %
4000 0.7 2800 184 4.60 %
3000 1 3000 197 6.56 %
10 000 7600 500
1 C∗ 500/7600
2 D∗ 100/A
Sharing of Loss Among the Depositors
As per the rules of Musharakah, loss to the pool, if any, would be distributed among
the pool members (Rabbul-m ¯al) according to their investment ratio. For example, if a
loss to pool A of $500 occurs, it will be distributed in the following manner:
Three months 3000 150
Six months 4000 200
One year 3000 150
Total loss 500
8.5.3 Instruments on the Assets Side
Islamic banking financing practice as of now reveals that the doors are open for utilizing
all legitimate modes including those based on Shirkah, trade or lease, whether to finance
trade, industry or a budget deficit through domestic or foreign sources. In order to prop-
erly manage the risk, the banks should manage diversified portfolios and select the proper
modes/instruments. The volume of investment deposits determines banks’ investment strate-
gies – if depositors are risk-averse, banks should also be risk-averse – investing in less risky
modes.
Musharakah/Mudarabah can be used for short-, medium- and long-term project financing,
import financing, preshipment export financing, working capital financing and financing all
single transactions. Banks use Diminishing Musharakah for purchase of fixed assets like
houses, transport, machinery, etc.
Murabaha can be used for the purchase and sale of automobiles, consumer durables and
trade financing, acquisition and holding of stock and inventory, spares and replacements,
raw material and semi-finished goods. Buy-back and rollover in Murabaha are not allowed.
Musawamah can be used for the financing of huge single transactions.
Salam has a vast potential in financing the productive activities in crucial sectors, par-
ticularly agriculture, agro-based industries and the rural economy as a whole for financing
agriculturists/farmers, commodity operations of public and private sectors and other pur-
chases of homogeneous goods.
Banks’ subsidiaries as trading and leasing companies can also provide finance on the
basis of Murabaha and leasing. They can deal with priority areas not only on the basis of
Murabaha, Salam and operating lease, but also on the basis of partnership. Ijarah, or leasing,
is best suited for financing of automobiles and machinery. There could also be a combination
of more than one mode like Istisna‘a plus Murabaha, Salam plus Murabaha or Salam plus
Istisna‘a for financing of trade and industry. Finance for the purchase and construction of
houses can be based on Diminishing Musharakah or Murabaha. Working capital finance can


----- p.192 (pdf 220) -----


192 Understanding Islamic Finance
be provided on the basis of Salam, Istisna‘a and Murabaha. Financing of big projects can
be made through syndicate Mudarabahs using the modes of Istisna‘a or Murabaha.
Appropriate modes of financing, as recommended by experts on Islamic finance, for
particular areas and transactions are as given below. 8
Modes for Financing Trade, Agriculture and Industry
Murabaha, instalment sale, leasing and Salam are particularly suitable for trade, while
Istisna‘a is especially suitable for industry. More specifically, in trade and industry, financing
is needed for the purchase of raw materials, inventory (goods in trade) and fixed assets
as well as some working capital, for the payment of salaries and other recurrent expenses.
Murabaha can be used for financing of all purchases of raw materials and inventory. For
procurement of fixed assets, including plant and machinery, buildings, etc., either instalments
sale or leasing can be used. Funds for recurrent expenses can be obtained by the advance
sale of final products of the company using Salam or Istisna‘a.
Household, Personal Finance, Consumer Banking
Personal finance for consumer durables can be provided through Murabaha, leasing and in
special cases by way of return-free loans out of the current accounts or the banks’ own funds
(depositors’ money in PLS accounts is a trust in the hands of banks and should not be used
for charitable and social purposes without their explicit approval).
Wakalah and Murabaha can be used for cash financing through charge and credit cards.
The alternatives for auto finance are Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek and Murabaha.
Housing finance is possible through Murabaha, Diminishing Musharakah and rent-sharing.
Treasury Operations – Liquidity and Fund Management
Liquidity management means ensuring that the bank has sufficient liquid funds available for
a smooth running of its operations and to meet short-term financial obligations as and when
due. It has to invest surplus funds, match maturity of assets and liabilities, accommodate
decreases in deposits/liabilities and increases in assets in an efficient and economic manner.
Fund management refers to securing and managing funds for the development of business.
Islamic banks may sell and purchase Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant money and capital market instru-
ments like stocks and Sukuk. Direct placement or acquisition of funds (in the inter-bank
funds market) on the basis of Mudarabah and Musharakah is also possible. The deficit
bank agrees to give a share of its profits according to a Mudarabah ratio that can either
be negotiated according to the market conditions or recommended by the central bank,
for the duration of the contract. In the case of Mudarabah, the following process can be
adopted:
1. A Mudarabah relationship will be created.
2. Funds received will be allocated to pools.
3. Weightages will be assigned periodically, based on different tiers/categories.
4. Profit earned will be allocated according to weightages assigned at the beginning of the
period.
8 Detailed processes for these modes of financing different areas/sectors are given in Chapter 14.


----- p.193 (pdf 221) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 193
5. The bank will charge a pre-agreed Mudarib fee as a percentage of the realized profit; the
bank can pay additional profit from its own share.
6. The investor will bear a loss unless it arises from misconduct or negligence of the
Mudarib.
Islamic banks may also agree to an arrangement with the central bank serving as a lender
of last resort. One option is financing on a Mudarabah basis; the central bank may agree to
provide liquidity for, say, a three day grace period with ceilings, followed by a Mudarabah
with profit-sharing ratio heavily favouring the central bank to discourage the Islamic bank
from resorting to the central bank’s funds for longer periods. Another option is the sale and
purchase of Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant certificates/Sukuk.
Sukuk are important for liquidity management. In Sukuk, an investor gets returns on
the basis of ownership rather than interest. Ijarah Sukuk are more common instruments in
this regard and are issued against assets for rental. To generate liquidity, Sukuk can be
sold/purchased in the secondary market. If the regulatory structure allows, Islamic banks
can sell the Sukuk to the central bank to generate liquidity. Sukuk can be structured on an
amortizing or bullet maturity basis.
Foreign Exchange Operations
Exchange of currencies and monetary units has to be subjected to the rules of Bai‘ al Sarf,
i.e. it must be simultaneous. Accordingly, spot purchase and sale of one currency against
another currency is allowed; forward purchase and sale is not allowed. However, IFIs can
enter into a promise to purchase and sell agreement. On this principle, foreign currency
forward cover is allowed with certain conditions, as discussed in Chapter 14. In order to
ensure that the transaction actually goes through, parties may stipulate any earnest money.
Negotiation of export documents is partially allowed.
Government/Public Sector Financing
Government and public sector enterprises can obtain finance by way of Mudarabah or
Musharakah certificates, which can be issued to purchase equipment or utility-generating
assets in order to lease them to public sector corporations. Ijarah and Istisna‘a are
best suited for infrastructure projects in the public sector. Recently, Ijarah Sukuk have
emerged as the most crucial instruments for financing of the public sector. Through
syndication arrangements, Islamic banks can supply goods/assets of enormous value to
government entities or corporations on a Murabaha basis by setting up joint Murabaha
funds. In such cases, ownership of Murabaha funds can also be securitized to offer
equity-based investment opportunities to the investors and the banks themselves. Returns
on these funds would be distributed among Sukuk/certificate holders on a pro rata
basis.
Alternatives to Foreign Loans
For the inflow of foreign resources, the instruments of portfolio investment through stock
markets, flotation of various categories of Sukuk and direct investment by foreigners can
be used.


----- p.194 (pdf 222) -----


194 Understanding Islamic Finance
Public as well as private enterprises can issue Musharakah and Ijarah Sukuk to finance
projects, especially development projects. Sukuk can be denominated in foreign as well
as domestic currencies and carry a predetermined proportion of the profit earned by their
respective projects. The Sukuk issued can be restricted to a particular project or earmarked
to a group of projects.
Various funds can be established to finance the economic activities of public and private
enterprises on equity, partnership, leasing, Salam and mixed asset pool bases. Funds can be
established to finance a specific sector, for example, agriculture, industry or infrastructure;
a particular industry, for example textiles, household durables, etc.; or general types of
projects.
Box 8.2: Islamic Banking Products and Services
Nature of Product/Service Modes and Basis
I. Deposits – fund mobilization
Current deposits Am ¯anah – Qard to bank; no return payable
Savings deposits Mudarabah
General investment term deposits Mudarabah
Special investment deposits Mudarabah, closed-and open-ended mutual
funds, Wakalatul Istism ¯ar
Individual portfolios Mudarabah, Wakalatul Istism ¯ar
Liquidity generation Tawarruq – reverse Murabaha, sale to any
3rd party
II. Trade finance, corporate finance
Project finance Musharakah, Mudarabah-based TFCs,
syndication through Mudarabah, Murabaha,
Istisna‘a, Ijarah/Ujrah
Working capital finance Murabaha, Salam, Musharakah in single
transactions
Export finance – preshipment Salam/Istisna‘a plus Murabaha and Wakalah,
Murabaha, Musharakah
Import finance Murabaha, Musharakah
Cash finance Salam, Istisna‘a, Tawarruq (sale to 3rd party)
Export finance – post shipment (bill
discounting)
Qardal Hasan in local currency (spot rate)
and promise to sell foreign exchange in future
market – exchange rate differential bank’s
income; Murabaha if funds needed for next
consignment
Letter of credit Commission, Ujrah along with Murabaha, etc.
Letter of guarantee Kafalah, service charge
III. Agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Production finance for input and
pesticides
Murabaha, Salam


----- p.195 (pdf 223) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 195
Tubewells, tractors, trailers, farm
machinery and transport (including
fishing boats)
Ijarah Munahia-bi-Tamleek, Salam,
Murabaha
Plough cattle, milk cattle and other
livestock; dairy and poultry
Murabaha, Salam
Storage and other farm construction
(sheds for animals, fencing, etc.)
Diminishing Musharakah or rent-sharing
Land development Operating Ijarah, Salam
Orchards, nurseries, forestry Salam, Musaqat
IV. Treasury
Money market – inter-bank Mudarabah with or without allocation of assets
Liquidity management Sale/purchase of permissible securities,
Parallel Salam, Tawarruq
Fund management Mudarabah, Wakalatul Istism ¯ar, trading in
permissible stocks and Sukuk
Trading in Sukuk, stocks Depending upon the nature of instruments
Forex operations Unilateral promise to buy/sell foreign
exchange simultaneously at pre-agreed rate
V. Personal advances (including consumer durables and housing)
Consumer durables Murabaha/instalments sale
Automobiles Ijarah Munahia-bi-Tamleek, Murabaha
Housing finance Diminishing Musharakah, Murabaha
Providing cash for personal needs Salam if possible, Tawarruq
8.6 THE ISSUE OF MODE PREFERENCE
According to the majority of scholars, the main instrument by which the interest-based
system has to be replaced is profit/loss sharing, encompassing Musharakah, Mudarabah and
their variants. The idea of replacing interest by profit sharing in the depositor–bank and
bank–business relationships, first mooted during the 1940s to 1960s, gained considerable
acceptance in the 1980s and 1990s. However, there are slight differences in approach and
priorities. While S.M. Hasanuz Zaman is not in favour of using Mudarabah 9 (on the assets
side) for non-trade operations 10, a vast majority of scholars have recommended its extensive
use. Nejatullah Siddiqi has discussed thoroughly the extended scope of Mudarabah. 11 To
him, it does not involve traits like Riba, Qim ¯ar, fraud, coercion, exploitation of needs, hazard
and uncertainty that could make it unlawful. He hints that although in practice the role
of profit-sharing and partnership is very small at present, they continue to dominate the
9 Alternatively, he recommends the use of Musharakah. As the combination of Mudarabah and Musharakah is also accepted by
Shar¯ı´ah scholars, the bank could use profit/loss sharing as a technique encompassing both modes, subject to the fulfilment of
relevant conditions.
10 Hasanuz Zaman, 1990 (1410 AH), pp. 69–88.
11 Siddiqi, 1991, pp. 21–34.


----- p.196 (pdf 224) -----


196 Understanding Islamic Finance
theory of Islamic banking. They are regarded as the norm towards which practice should,
and will, eventually gravitate. Like him, a large group of Islamic economists insist that
Islamic banking and finance will have to rely on profit-sharing contracts if the objectives of
socio-economic justice, efficiency and stability of the economic system are to be achieved.
Similarly, according to Umer Chapra, the most important and unanimously agreed upon
form of financing provided by Islamic banks would be on the basis of Mudarabah, Shirkah or
acquisition of shares of joint stock companies. Chapra has given its rationale in the following
words:
“The general principle, which is beyond dispute as being the criterion for determining the permis-
sibility or otherwise of any method of financing, is that the financier cannot avert the taking of at
least some risk if he wishes to derive an income. To put this in the form of an adage, one could
state with respect to all financing operations: no risk, no gain”. 12
On the other hand, as pointed out by Abdul Halim Ismail, the approach of Islamic banks’
practitioners is different from the general approach adopted by Islamic economists. He
considers that the contracts of exchange, both for instant and deferred prices, are more
relevant to Islamic financial institutions and equally legitimate as per Qur’ ¯anic injunctions.
Giving more importance to PLS modes according to the popular theory of Islamic finance
has been formulated incorrectly. He has divided the writers on Islamic finance into the
categories of “Islamic economists” and “Islamic bankers”. While the economists group is
in favour of replacing interest with a PLS system as a main policy tool, bankers have
tended to give equal importance to debt-based modes involving both trade and leasing.
Islamic bankers are remarkably uniform in their application of exchange contracts, including
both trade and leasing. He blames Islamic economists for not deriving their theory of PLS
preference from the Holy Qur’ ¯an and considers the contracts of exchange on a par with the
contracts of profit-sharing. He argues that the current practice of Islamic finance, in contrast
to the general perception of Islamic finance theory, is largely based on trade/exchange-based
transactions.
However, the point is that Islamic economists have not prohibited debt-creating modes;
the issue is of preference only and that, too, on account of the possible impact of risk-based
versus risk-free capital in an economy. As exchange-based modes also involve risk-sharing,
Islamic economists have allowed them subject to the fulfilment of relevant conditions. Their
stress on profit-sharing modes is for their better socio-economic impact and to avoid any
back doors to interest.
Analysing the issue from another angle, the replacement of the interest-based system by
an alternative profit-sharing system raises a number of fundamental theoretical, practical and
policy questions. The questions being discussed in the emerging literature include, among
others, the following:
• What is the theoretical framework underlying Islamic banking and finance?
• Will the Islamic system be more or less stable than the traditional interest-based system?
• What will be the effect of the adoption of an interest-free Islamic system on important
macroeconomic variables like saving and investment?
• Will monetary policy have a role to play in such a system?
12 Chapra, 1985.


----- p.197 (pdf 225) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 197
As regards the first two questions above, Mohsin S. Khan takes the view that the replace-
ment of interest by some type of profit-sharing arrangement makes the Islamic system an
equity-based system, as opposed to a traditional debt-based system. Using the concept of
equity participation, he has developed a theoretical model to examine the working of the
Islamic banking system. He has shown that the Islamic system may well turn out to be better
suited than the interest-based banking system to adjust to shocks that can lead to banking
crises. In an equity-based system, shocks to the assets position of banks are immediately
absorbed by changes in the nominal values of shares (deposits) held by the public in banks.
Therefore, the real value of assets and liabilities would be equal at all points in time. In
the conventional banking system, since the nominal value of deposits is guaranteed, such
shocks can cause a divergence between real assets and real liabilities, and it is not clear
how this disequilibrium can be corrected and how long the process of adjustment would
take.13
On the basis of this analysis, Mohsin Khan has had an important insight that from an
economic standpoint, the principal difference between the Islamic and traditional banking
systems is not that one allows interest payments and the other does not. The more relevant
distinction is that the Islamic system treats deposits as shares and accordingly does not
guarantee their nominal value, whereas in the traditional system, such deposits are guaranteed
either by the banks or by the government.
As regards the impact of adoption of the Islamic system (the third question above),
Waqar Masood concludes that in a full Islamic system, the costs of monitoring would be
insignificant and the equity participation arrangement would be superior to the interest-
based system. Honesty and faithfulness to the terms of one’s contract are an indispensable
ingredient of Islamic behaviour. The driving force of a truly Islamic society is the existence
of a strong ideological consensus that the success of the society and its members depends
on how closely the rules of the Shar ¯ı´ah are followed. 14
Nadeem ul Haque and Mirakhor are of the view that the adoption of a profit-sharing
arrangement between the lender and investor may raise monitoring costs that could have
an adverse effect on the supply of credit, and thus on investment. They are of the view
that individual contracts can be designed to take into account the moral hazard problem.
Avoiding an adverse effect on investment would require implementation of a legal and
institutional framework that facilitates contracting. The Islamic law of contracts provides
for such a framework, but it has not yet been fully adopted in countries where an Islamic
banking system is being established. In the absence of this framework, monitoring costs
could be prohibitive and investment could consequently be discouraged. On the other hand,
if legal measures are present to safeguard the terms of contracts, the level of investment may
increase.15
Shahrukh Rafi Khan, while discussing the implications of introducing a PLS system, has
concluded that: 16
1. Expectation-based profit-sharing ratios can serve as a pricing mechanism to bring the
loanable funds market into equilibrium.
2. The elimination of risk-free assets with positive returns will leave lenders worse off.
13 Khan and Mirakhor, 1987, pp. 15–36.
14 Khan and Mirakhor, 1987, pp. 75–105.
15 Khan and Mirakhor, 1987, pp. 125–161.
16 Khan and Mirakhor, 1987, pp. 107–124.


----- p.198 (pdf 226) -----


198 Understanding Islamic Finance
3. Profit-sharing ratios are relatively inefficient instruments of monetary policy.
4. The introduction of interest-free banking does not necessarily lead to a situation where
all profitable projects will be financed irrespective of their rate of return.
However, Mohsin Khan and Mirakhor do not feel convinced by these conclusions because
they are conditional on the model and the specific assumptions under which the results are
obtained. The traditional welfare comparisons made by Rafi Khan are incorrect because the
welfare function itself will change with Islamization of the economy.
Regarding the impact on savings, Nadeem ul Haque and Abbas Mirakhor have concluded
that the rate of return also increases as risk increases, and then savings may, in fact, rise.
The structural changes accompanying the implementation of an Islamic financial system
may produce favourable effects on the rate of return on financial assets. As such, there is
no a priori reason for believing that savings in an Islamic system will necessarily be lower
than in an interest-based system.
The above discussion implies that all Islamic modes have potential for development. The
institution of Mudarabah serves as a basis of business to be conducted by combining funds
and the expertise of different groups of people. Shirkah-based (PLS) modes that provide
the much-needed risk-based funds can be used for short-, medium- and long-term project
financing, import financing, preshipment export financing, working capital financing and
financing of all single transactions. Mudarabah Sukuk can be issued to mobilize funds and
strengthen trading and industrial activities. SPVs can manage such assets as trusts/funds
for conducting business for their benefit as well as the Sukuk holders. This could generate
higher rates of return for the investors relative to the return realizable on any interest-based
investment.
As visualized by Homoud, if the profit rate in Mudarabah-based businesses is as low as
10 % and the annual turnover is 3, the realized profits may reach 30 % per annum. “These
profits may be distributed at an equal sharing ratio or at the rate 1/3 to 2/3 between Mudarabah
certificate holders and the management of the institution. /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiThe idea has the potential to
alleviate the hardships of low income people in many countries.” 17 In the case of big projects,
the IFIs may form a consortium to issue certificates to the public for subscription. Similarly,
they can carry out work on infrastructure and socio-economic projects in coordination and
partnership with the engineering firms.
The non-PLS techniques not only complement the PLS modes but also provide flexibility
of choice to meet the needs of different sectors and economic agents in society. Murabaha
with less risk has several advantages vis-à-vis other techniques and can be helpful in
employment generation and alleviation of poverty. Leasing can be very much conducive to
the formation of fixed assets and medium- and long-term investments.
Salam has a vast potential in financing the productive activities in crucial sectors, partic-
ularly agriculture, agro-based industries and the rural economy as a whole. It provides an
incentive to enhance production and leads to the creation of a stable commodities market
with stability in prices. To realize this potential, IFIs could organize a forward commodity
trade market on the basis of Salam. This would provide not only a nonspeculative forward
market for resource mobilization and investment but would also be a powerful vehicle for
rural finance.
17 Homoud, 1998.


----- p.199 (pdf 227) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 199
8.7 ISLAMIC INVESTMENT BANKING
Islamic investment banking can be easily understood in the light of conventional investment
banking. An Islamic investment bank provides exactly the same products and services as a con-
ventional bank does. The distinguishing factor, however, is that their products and services are
tailored in a Shar¯ı´ah-compliant manner while meeting the clients’ requirements. Islamic invest-
ment banks manage portfolios for institutions, corporate clients and high net worth individuals,
as well as pooled investment vehicles such as unit trusts and mutual funds. Asset management
companies managing conventional funds are now gearing up for Islamic funds.
The following are the opportunities for Islamic asset management:
• open and closed-end mutual funds;
• equity benchmarks;
• leasing companies involved in asset-backed financing.
Islamic investment banks provide venture capital financing to small, medium and big
companies in a number of sectors. They avoid involvement in prohibited and unlawful
activities and offer services to all projects except those manufacturing or dealing with
forbidden products and services, such as alcohol, pork, entertainment, interest-based financial
services and the like. Their services relate to venture capital and corporate finance, including
syndication finance, project finance and transactions in the capital markets.
Asset management or management of funds includes equity funds, real estate funds as well
as alternative investments in Ijarah and other Sukuk. They engage in treasury operations for
managing the asset–liability mismatch created by different tenors of investment opportunities
and different return profiles.
Islamic corporate finance activities of investment institutions are similar to conventional
corporate finance except that the products and services offered are Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant. These
services include:
• equity issues such as IPOs, offers for sale, rights issues;
• private placements;
• strategic reviews;
• financial restructurings;
• acquisitions, divestments, mergers;
• joint ventures, alliance searches and studies.
Islamic investment banks also undertake syndicate financing, which is usually a large
financing facility granted to a key industrial or trading organization and lead-managed by a
bank of strong base. Since the amount involved is large, a number of financial institutions par-
ticipate in the financing. An Islamic syndication facility can be provided through Murabaha,
Mudarabah, Musharakah, Ijarah or leasing (detailed processes are given in relevant chapters
of the book).
8.8 ISLAMIC FINANCIAL MARKETS AND INSTRUMENTS
Islamic financial markets, like their conventional counterparts, comprise money and capital
markets, but the instruments and the procedures of functioning are different. An Islamic


----- p.200 (pdf 228) -----


200 Understanding Islamic Finance
financial market would be free of interest and would work on a different set of principles. 18
The Islamic Fiqh Council of the OIC has observed:
“Although the original concept of financial markets is sound and its application is very much needed
in the present-day context, yet their existing structure does not present an example to carry out the
objective of investment and growth of capital within the Islamic framework. This situation requires
serious academic efforts to be undertaken in collaboration between the jurists and the economists,
so that it may be possible to review the existing system with its procedure and instruments and to
amend what needs amendment in the light of the recognized principles of Shar ¯ı´ah”.
The major instruments of Islamic financial markets are equity related. Besides equity
instruments in the form of shares in any company, the Islamic financial system has other
redeemable short-, medium- and long-term participating instruments representing ownership
in the assets, and hence entitled to participate in the profit/loss resulting from the operations
on the assets. Various types of participatory instruments can be based on (i) profit/loss sharing
(Mudarabah/Musharakah), like instruments issued by Mudarabah and asset management
companies and participation term certificates (PTCs), and (ii) rent-sharing in the form of
Diminishing Musharakah or otherwise.
A pure debt or bonds market is not an active part of the Islamic financial markets because
debt liabilities have to be paid at the nominal value subject to observance of the rules of
Hawalah (recourse to the original debtor if the assignor is not able to pay the liability). The
instruments on the basis of which the Islamic market has to function need to be backed by
or represent real asset transactions. A debt security would result from a transaction based on
any trading or Ijarah mode that can implicitly include time value of money at the stage of
pricing of the underlying commodities or usufruct of the assets.
These instruments may be of either a variable or quasi-fixed/fixed return nature. Equity
instruments having a claim to share in the net income and the assets of a business give a
variable return, while debt-related instruments can be issued in respect of trade or leasing-
based transactions subject to the observation of the principles of the underlying Islamic
modes. Backing by real assets according to the rules of the relevant modes is a must and
mere replacement of one paper transaction with another kind of similar paper transaction
will not serve the real purpose.
Islamic financial market instruments can be of two types in terms of their nature and flow
of return:
1. Fixed/quasi-fixed (stable) income securities. A bank can securitize or sell a pool of assets
or offer certificates of deposit (CODs) against a fund composed of pooled Ijarah and
some Murabaha and Istisna‘a contracts. It will offer the investors/depositors a defined
stream of cash flow constituting the return on the pooled assets. Such securities would
accommodate risk-averse investors like widows, retired people, etc. and generate new
resources for additional intermediation and income flow to the banks.
2. Variable income (Shirkah-based) securities. For such securities, banks can securitize a
pool of Musharakah and Mudarabah contracts that are part of their asset portfolio. Such
securities will offer the investors a stream of variable income with potential for growth,
based on the strength of the underlying projects – profit and risk both would be higher than
18 For details see Ahmad, Ausaf, 1997.


----- p.201 (pdf 229) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 201
in the case of stable income securities. These would accommodate risk-taking investors
with the commensurate possibility of a higher income.
8.8.1 Islamic Funds
Fund management can be conducted both by commercial and investment banks, but presently,
mostly investment banks are involved. Due to the asset-based nature of Islamic finance, this
type of business is more suitable for IFIs than short-term commercial banking.
Fund management refers to investors pooling their resources to purchase a larger num-
ber of shares through any manager collectively, which otherwise they could not purchase
individually. About 150 mutual funds of various categories are providing low risk/moderate
return, balanced risk/return and high risk/high return Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant investment facilities
to investors in various parts of the world. While presently Islamic mutual funds are operating
mainly in Saudi Arabia, UAE, Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, Pakistan, Malaysia, Brunei, Singa-
pore, Germany, Ireland, the UK, the USA, Canada, Switzerland and South Africa, efforts
are underway to provide investment facilities through mutual funds in all parts of the world
to capture the emerging demand. Most of these funds are equity funds while a number of
hybrid funds are managing leasing, real estate, Takaful and other funds.
Management of the funds can be carried out on Mudarabah or agency basis. In the case
of Mudarabah, the fund manager would get any pre-agreed percentage of the realized profit,
while in the case of an agency arrangement, the manager would get a fee on agreed terms
that may be any specified amount or percentage of the net asset value of the fund.
Shaikh Taqi Usmani has indicated the following categories of Islamic investment fund:
1. Equity funds, the proceeds of which are invested in shares of joint stock companies,
and returns in the form of capital gains and dividends are distributed on a pro rata basis
among the investors.
2. Ijarah funds. The amounts of such funds are used to purchase the assets for the purpose
of leasing. Rentals received from the user are distributed among subscribers of the fund.
Ijarah Sukuk can be traded in the secondary market on the basis of market forces. Anyone
who purchases these Sukuk replaces the sellers in the pro rata ownership of the relevant
assets and all the rights and obligations of the original subscriber are passed on to him.
3. Commodity funds, in which the subscription amounts are used to purchase different
commodities for the purpose of resale. The profits generated by the sales are distributed
among the subscribers.
4. Murabaha funds. Any fund created for Murabaha sale should be a closed-end fund;
its units cannot be negotiable in a secondary market as an Islamic bank’s portfolio of
Murabaha does not own any tangible assets.
5. Mixed funds, the subscription amounts of which are employed in different types of invest-
ments like equities, leasing, commodities, etc. For trading of mixed funds, the tangible assets
should be more than 51 %, while the liquid assets and debts less than 50 %.19
Asset Management Through Equity Funds
As compared to a conventional equity fund, in which a fixed return is tied up with its
face value, an Islamic equity fund must carry a pro rata profit actually earned by the fund.
19 Usmani, 2000a, pp. 203–218.


----- p.202 (pdf 230) -----


202 Understanding Islamic Finance
Therefore, neither the principal nor a rate of profit (tied up with the principal) can be
guaranteed. On the basis of the risk profiles of the investors and the investment strategy of
the asset management companies, equity funds can be divided into four categories:
1. Regular income funds: the objective of these funds is to earn profit through dividends of
investee companies. Such funds provide a regular income stream by way of dividends to
their investors who are mostly risk-averse, like old and retired people.
2. Capital gain funds: the objective of these funds is to earn profit through capital gain from
frequent sale and purchase of Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant stocks. These funds can provide a better
return to moderate risk-taker investors by proper management and risk diversification.
3. Aggressive funds: these funds invest in high-risk securities to generate abnormal profits
for their investors. They do not allow every investor to invest and limit the portfolio to
high-risk investors as chances of loss are greater.
4. Balanced funds: such funds invest in high quality securities with less risk and give to
the investors a regular income stream based on dividends and capital gain. These funds
adopt a “capital proactive” approach.
Screening and Purification Criteria
Equity stocks included in the funds need to be compliant with Shar ¯ı´ah guidelines. Shar ¯ı´ah
boards of IFIs develop a tolerance level in respect of investments in stocks. The selection
of stocks goes through a strict screening process decided by the respective Shar ¯ı´ah boards.
Keeping in mind the scenario in the markets, this tolerance level might be different in different
financial institutions and markets. Generally, the screening criteria tend to ensure that:
1. The investee company’s capital structure is predominantly equity based (debt less than 33 %).
2. Prohibited activities such as gambling, interest-based financial institutions, alcohol pro-
duction, etc. are excluded.
3. Only a negligible portion of the income of an investee company is derived from interest
on securities. (In the case of Al Meezan Islamic funds, for example, the income of an
investee company from nonpermissible income should not exceed 5 % of total income.)
4. The value of share should not be less than the value of the net liquid assets of the company.
The most widely known are the Dow Jones Islamic Market Index Criteria, encompassing
the following:
1. The basic business of the investee company should be Halal.
2. Debt to market capitalization: total debt divided by 12-month average market capitaliza-
tion should be less than 33 %.
3. Cash and interest-bearing securities: the sum of the company’s cash and interest-bearing
securities divided by the trailing 12-month average market capitalization should be less
than 33 %.
4. Accounts receivable: accounts receivable divided by the trailing 12-month average market
capitalization should be less than 33 %.
Further, Islamic asset management companies have to purify their income by deducting
from the returns on the investments the earnings emanating from any unacceptable source
from the Shar ¯ı´ah point of view. It is obligatory to dole away the prohibited income that
is mixed up with the earnings of the company, and this obligation is on the one who is
the owner of the shares or Sukuk – the investor. Purification is not obligatory for the


----- p.203 (pdf 231) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 203
intermediary, agent or manager because wages or commission are their right in lieu of the
work they have undertaken. In the case of fund management, it is the responsibility of the
management company to exclude prohibited income.
Al-Meezan Investment Management (Pakistan), which operates a number of Islamic funds,
calculates the percentage of noncompliant income to the gross revenue (net sales + other
income) for each investee company and this percentage is called the charity rate. The charity
rate for each investee company is multiplied by the dividend income from the respective
companies to get the charitable amount. This charitable amount is then transferred to a
separate account.
Islamic equity funds experienced excellent growth during the late 1990s. In 1996, for
example, there were 29 Islamic equity funds on the market with $800 million in assets. By
early 2000, the number of funds had grown to 98, with approximately $5 billion in assets.
Today there are over 100 Islamic equity funds on the market, offering investment solutions
to meet any Islamic investor’s taste.
8.8.2 Principles Relating to Stocks
Since investment in stocks of joint stock companies is the core business of Islamic investment
banks and other NBFIs, we may briefly discuss its main features and aspects. The Islamic
Fiqh Council of the OIC in its seventh session (9–14th May, 1992) resolved the following
in respect of shares of joint stock companies: 20
1. Trading in stocks of companies
— Since the essential thing about transactions is the nature of their business, the estab-
lishment of a joint stock company with unprohibited purposes and activities is per-
missible.
— Trading in stocks of companies whose main purpose is a prohibited activity, such as
transactions with Riba, production of, or dealing in, prohibited products is prohibited.
— Trading in stocks of companies that deal at times in prohibited things, such as Riba,
etc., but their main activities are not based on any prohibited business is permissible.
2. Underwriting: underwriting is an agreement made upon establishment of a company with
someone who undertakes to guarantee the sale of all or part of the shares being issued,
i.e. to undertake to subscribe for shares that remain unsubscribed by others. There is no
Shar¯ı´ah objection to this provided that the obligee subscribes to the shares at nominal
value without any compensation for the commitment per se , though the obligee may
receive compensation for work other than the underwriting – such as making feasibility
studies or marketing of shares.
3. Object of the contract in the sale of shares: the object of the contract in the sale of
shares is the unidentified portion of the company’s assets (known as Musha‘a in Islamic
jurisprudence) and the share certificate is a document attesting entitlement to the said
portion.
4. Preference shares: it is not permissible to issue preference shares with financial charac-
teristics that involve guaranteed payment of the capital or of a certain amount of profit or
ensure precedence over other shares at the time of liquidation or distribution of dividends.
20 This is a brief summary of the resolution; for details, see Council of the Islamic Fiqh Academy, 2000.


----- p.204 (pdf 232) -----


204 Understanding Islamic Finance
It is, however, permissible to give certain shares such characteristics as are related to the
procedural or administrative matters.
5. Borrowing on interest for investment in shares: it is not permissible to purchase a share
with an interest-bearing loan offered to the purchaser by a broker or any other party
against pawning of the share, as this involves Riba. Nor is it permissible to sell a share
that the seller does not possess but has received as pledge from a broker, since such a
deal falls within the framework of sale of something that the seller does not own. The
prohibition shall be more categorical if the deal is conditional upon payment of the share
price to the broker, who would then benefit by depositing this price at interest in order
to obtain compensation for the loan.
8.8.3 Investment Sukuk as Islamic Market Instruments
Sukuk (the plural of the word Sak) were used by the Muslim societies of the Middle Ages
as “papers” representing financial obligations originating from trade and other commercial
activities. However, the Sukuk structures presently found in Islamic finance are different
from the Sukuk originally used and are akin to the conventional concept of securitization,
a process in which ownership of the underlying assets is transferred to a large number
of investors through papers commonly known as certificates, Sukuk or other instruments
representing proportionate value of the relevant assets.
Investment Sukuk are different in nature from common shares of joint stock companies.
These are certificates of equal value representing undivided shares in ownership of tangible
assets of particular projects or specific investment activity, usufruct and services. 21
Sukuk can be of a number of types, based on the Shar ¯ı´ah mode used as the underlying
contract or subcontract, the most important of which are Shirkah, Ijarah, Salam and Istisna‘a.
As per the basic rules of Shar ¯ı´ah, investment Sukuk have to be structured, on one side, on
the Mudarabah principle. On the other side, business can be conducted through participatory
or fixed-return modes/instruments. Thus, the rates of return on Sukuk will be either variable
(if the modes on the second leg are participatory) or quasi-fixed (in the case of modes with
a fixed return). Sukuk can be made fixed-return Sukuk through the provision of any third
party guarantee. 22
The primary markets operate on the basis of equity principles like shares, redeemable
equity capital, Mudarabah/Musharakah certificates (MCs) or Sukuk representing ownership
in leased assets or debt instruments resulting from trading modes issued directly to investors
or fund providers. While the price of Sukuk in the primary market is derived through
calculating the weighted average of the bids received for the premium to be offered over the
benchmark, the price in secondary market trading depends upon the nature of the security
being traded.
According to mainstream Islamic finance theory, pure debt securities do not have a
secondary market in principle. However, there is the possibility of securitization of debts
resulting from real trading transactions when they are pooled with other assets or instruments
representing ownership in real assets. All equity or participatory instruments have a secondary
market because they represent ownership in assets of the companies.
21 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, pp. 298–300.
22 Council of the Islamic Fiqh Academy, 2000, p. 65.


----- p.205 (pdf 233) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 205
Sukuk can be issued by governments, corporations, banking and nonbanking financial
institutions and by business/industrial concerns. As forward sale/purchase of goods through
Salam rules is permissible, there is also the possibility of a commodity forward market,
which, of course, will be different from the conventional commodity futures market. As
such, the following types of market governed by principles of relevant contracts or modes
are available in the Islamic financial structure:
• equity or stock markets;
• securities markets like nongovernment securities (banks, non-banks, corporate and hous-
ing securities);
• government and municipal securities market;
• commodity futures market;
• inter-bank money market for placement of funds on a Mudarabah basis;
• foreign exchange market (limited).
8.8.4 Trading in Financial Instruments
Islamic investment vehicles that are traded in Islamic financial markets include Shar ¯ı´ah-
compliant stocks wherein income is derived from dividends and capital gains keeping
in mind the screening criteria recommended by Shar ¯ı´ah scholars. Other instruments are
Mudarabah/Musharakah certificates, units of open- or closed-ended mutual funds and invest-
ment Sukuk, wherein income is derived from buying, selling and also getting returns from
the underlying businesses and assets.
Stocks/securities/certificates/Sukuk can be traded in the market depending on market
signals, provided there is compliance with the following Shar ¯ı´ah rules:
• Instruments representing real physical assets and usufructs are negotiable at market prices.
Certificates or Sukuk issued by Musharakah, Mudarabah and Ijarah are covered under
this category.
• Instruments representing debts and money are subject for their negotiability to the rules
of Hawalah 23 (assignment of debt) and Bai‘ al Sarf (exchange of monetary units).
• Instruments representing a pool of different categories are subject to the rules relating to
the dominant category. If cash and debts/receivables are relatively larger, the rule of Bai‘
al Sarf applies, and if real/physical assets and usufructs are overwhelming, trading would
be based on the market price. 24
8.8.5 Inter-bank Funds Market
The Islamic inter-bank funds market can function on the Mudarabah principle or sale and
purchase of instruments under the relevant rules of the Shar ¯ı´ah. Presently, a Mudarabah-
based regular market is functioning in Malaysia. In other countries, banks place their surplus
funds with deficit banks for short periods ranging from a day to a week. Mostly, these
short-term deposits are treated just like other deposits mobilized from the public and profits
are paid on the basis of weightages assigned and the daily product of the deposits, while
23 Discussed in detail in the previous chapter.
24 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, pp. 305–307.


----- p.206 (pdf 234) -----


206 Understanding Islamic Finance
sometimes a special procedure is adopted, according to which the deficit bank agrees to give
a share of its general profits according to a Mudarabah ratio that is negotiated according to
the market conditions. Central banks can also advise profit-sharing ratios for the duration of
the fund placements.
In Malaysia, the Islamic Inter-bank Money Market (IIMM) was introduced in January,
1994 as a short-term intermediary to provide a ready source of short-term investment
outlets based on Shar ¯ı´ah principles. BNM issued the guidelines on the IIMM in December
1993 to facilitate proper implementation of the IIMM. The IIMM covers the following
aspects: (i) inter-bank trading of Islamic financial instruments and (ii) Mudarabah inter-
bank investments (MII). Islamic banks, commercial banks, merchant banks, eligible finance
companies and discount houses are allowed to participate in the IIMM.
MII refers to a mechanism whereby a deficit Islamic banking institution (“investee bank”)
can obtain investment from a surplus Islamic banking institution (“investor bank”) based on
the Mudarabah principle. The period of investment is from overnight to 12 months, while
the rate of return is based on the rate of gross profit before distribution for investments of
1 year of the investee bank. The profit-sharing ratio is negotiable between both parties. The
investor bank, at the time of negotiation, does not know what the return will be, as the actual
return will be crystallized towards the end of the investment period. The principal invested
is repaid at the end of the period, together with a share of the profit arising from use of the
fund by the investee bank.
Beginning 2nd February, 1996, BNM introduced the minimum benchmark rate for the
MII, i.e. the prevailing rate of the government investment issues plus a spread of 0.5 %. The
purpose of the benchmark rate is to ensure that only banks with reasonable rates of return
participate in the MII.
CODs and COIs, as discussed in a preceding section, can also be negotiated in the Islamic
money market. In recent years, Ijarah-based negotiable Islamic money instruments have
also been developed. Islamic banks can engage in trading of these instruments for liquidity
management subject to observance of the Shar ¯ı´ah rules involved in the relevant modes.
8.8.6 Islamic Forward Markets
Based on the three types of contracts relating to future delivery, three different types of
forward market can be considered in the framework of Islamic finance:
1. A Salam-based forward market (for products and commodities for which a regular market
exists).
2. An Istisna‘a-based forward market, basically for infrastructural and developmental
projects.
3. A Ju‘alah-based forward market for service-based activities.
Three points require serious attention in the concept of Salam trade from the point of view
of future trading. First, delivery of the goods is compulsory. Second, unlike the contemporary
futures market, reselling of a Salam commodity before it is received is not permitted by the
Shar¯ı´ah experts. However, Parallel Salam of the same goods, for the same date of delivery,
is allowed. Third, a Salam contract strictly requires advance payment of the price of the
goods. The contemporary futures market, on the contrary, does not require any advance
payment to the seller.
Earning income from mere speculation on prices without having an explicit part in the
real activity comes under the category of gambling. All such activities in the futures market


----- p.207 (pdf 235) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 207
that are meant to make a possible income simply by making good guesses with no intention
to receive or deliver goods are not allowed. Unlike the conventional futures market, the
actual delivery as well as its receipt will be mandatory and cannot be offset by writing a
reversing futures contract in the Salam-based futures market.
In Istisna‘a and Ju‘alah markets too, the contract will be completed only by making or
receiving actual delivery of the goods or service concerned. An Istisna‘a contract can be
made only for those commodities that are required to be specially produced according to the
defined specifications and are not otherwise available in the market. For a Ju‘alah contract,
no physical goods qualify; only services qualify for such a contract.
Prices will be determined by competitive bids and offers made by traders interested in
real selling and buying. For an Islamic future exchange, a bidding to purchase means a
commitment to make the payment in advance. It also requires determining a certain time
interval for quoting the new prices, unlike the conventional futures exchange where new
prices can be offered at any time.
An Istisna‘a-based futures market will be different from a Salam-based market because
of longer term transactions and hence will require a different legal institutional framework.
Though there is nothing in Shar ¯ı´ah to bar Istisna‘a contracts for a short run, for the devel-
opment of a meaningful futures market, particularly with the aim of resource mobilization
for development, it will be the long-term Istisna‘a-based futures contract that will serve the
purpose. Prices of Istisna‘a-based futures contracts in the market may not widely fluctuate
over the short term, as they are expected to in the Salam-based futures market. This would
make this market useful for small savers who are interested in protecting the real value of
their savings. These contracts would provide them with a means to index their savings with
inflation.25
Box 8.3: Islamic Capital Market Instruments and Operations
Islamic financial market instruments can represent the following assets:
• ownership in a company or a business, e.g. stocks and Musharakah or Mudarabah
Sukuk;
• ownership of durable assets or the usufruct of such assets, e.g. Ijarah Sukuk;
• ownership of debt arising from Murabaha, Istisna‘a or Salam financing;
• a combination of the above categories.
Tradability
• Islamic money market instruments can either be tradable or nontradable in the
secondary market;
• instruments representing ownership in business, real physical assets and usufructs
are negotiable at market prices;
• instruments representing ownership of debt are not tradable in the secondary market,
as sale of debt is not permissible in Islamic law;
25 Khan, 1995.


----- p.208 (pdf 236) -----


208 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 8.3: (Continued)
• instruments representing a combination of different categories are subject to rules
relating to the dominant category.
Treasury Functions
• Debt portfolio management
— manage the debt portfolio which emerges from the accumulation of individual
financing transactions so as to achieve an acceptable cost and risk profile for
the portfolio over time.
• Risk management
— advise on and implement effective hedging of treasury type risks, especially
foreign exchange, return rate, liquidity, settlement, credit and counterparty risks.
Sukuk Structures
• Musharakah Sukuk
— co-ownership of assets or business with control and management rights;
— payments supported by income generated by assets of business;
— tradable.
• Mudarabah Sukuk
— ownership of assets or business without control and management rights;
— payments supported by income generated by assets of business;
— tradable.
• Ijarah Sukuk
— sale and lease-back structure;
— could either be based on fixed or floating rate structures;
— payments supported by lease rentals;
— tradable.
• Salam Sukuk
— ownership of debt resulting from a Salam transaction (i.e. advance payment of
funds, future delivery of assets);
— short-term maturity;
— nontradable.
• Istisna‘a Sukuk
— ownership of debt arising from an Istisna‘a transaction (i.e. advance payment
of funds, in full or in instalments for construction of an asset);
— nontradable.


----- p.209 (pdf 237) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 209
8.8.7 Foreign Exchange Market in the Islamic Framework
A foreign exchange market can function in the Islamic financial structure keeping in mind
the limitations set by the Shar ¯ı´ah. IFIs can engage in direct placement or investment in
Shar¯ı´ah-compliant F.E. denominated securities like Solidity Trust Certificates issued by
IDB in 2003 and many other Sukuk.
A foreign currency forward cover facility is also available in the present Islamic financial
structure. Contemporary Shar ¯ı´ah scholars have observed that forward cover is permissible
subject to the following conditions:
• The amount of foreign currency is needed for genuine trade or payment transactions.
This need will have to be supported by appropriate documents so as to prevent forward
cover for speculative purposes. It implies that money changers or forex dealers relying
on book-out transactions cannot take such cover.
• The forward cover shall be through a formal promise to sell or purchase and it shall
not be a sale and purchase agreement. This means that sale/purchase shall take place
simultaneously at the agreed time in future at the rate agreed upon initially at the time of
agreement to sell or purchase.
• While it will be permissible to fix the price of foreign currency in terms of local currency
according to the agreement, no forward cover fee shall be recovered. However, an amount
may be demanded by the bank from its client in advance by way of earnest money
(Hamish Jiddiyah) against foreign currency agreed to be purchased/sold at a future date.
If, at the agreed time, the promisor does not perform, the bank can recover the differential
and adjust the earnest money there against.
8.8.8 Derivatives and Islamic Finance
Conventional options, swaps and futures stem from debts and involve sale and purchase of
debts/liabilities. As a group, such instruments are called derivatives, i.e. they are derived from
the expected future performance of the respective underlying assets. These are very complex
and risky contracts with a present market value of trillions of dollars around the world. It has
been observed, however, that the global financial market is becoming increasingly fragile as
more and more derivatives and “hedging” instruments emerge.
Conventional options confer merely rights and not liabilities. An option has a nominal
size, this being the amount of underlying asset that the option holder may buy or sell at
the strike price – the price at which the holder may like to buy or sell the underlying asset
upon exercise of the option. If the price moves favourably, the option is exercised and the
commodity is bought/sold at the agreed price. If the price moves unfavourably, the buyer
of the option simply abandons it. This is against the principle of the Shar ¯ı´ah, according to
which delivery has to be given and taken pursuant to the sale contracts without regard to
movement in prices. The buyer of the option pays a price (the premium) to the seller (the
writer) of the option. Hence, the feature that an option contract confers the right but not the
obligation to enter into an underlying contract of exchange at or before a specified future
date (the expiry date) makes the contract non-Shar ¯ı´ah compliant.
Some writers have discussed the possibility of put and call options 26 in legitimate goods
and stocks on the basis of ‘Arb ¯un and reverse ‘Arb ¯un (for example, putting a condition in the
26 A call option is the right to buy while the right to sell is referred to as a put option.


----- p.210 (pdf 238) -----


210 Understanding Islamic Finance
sale agreement that if the seller backs out after taking ‘Arb ¯un, he will have to pay double the
amount to the buyer), as prevalent in the legal system in some Arab countries, particularly in the
Jordanian Civil Code. For example, Al Sanhuri, as a member of the committee which drafted
that law, has contended that reverse ‘Arb¯un, which could validate put options, is in accordance
with Islamic principles. Shaikh Al Dharir has, however, rejected the concept of reverse ‘Arb¯un
and the viewpoint of Sanhuri on the grounds that such a clause in the legal system in some
countries is discussed under secular legislation only and not under Islamic legal works.
As regards options relating to currencies, interest rates and stock indices, all agree that
these have no place in Islamic finance. 27
Further, among the major schools of Islamic jurisprudence, only the Hanbali uphold
‘Arb¯un with the condition imposed by some of them that time should be stipulated for the
option. The OIC Fiqh Council has also endorsed ‘Arb ¯un but only if a time limit is specified.
Even if ‘Arb ¯un is accepted as a valid transaction, most of the derivatives currently in the
market would still be unacceptable from the Shar ¯ı´ah angle due to the involvement of Gharar
and Riba. A call option can be considered near to Bai‘ al ‘Arb ¯un in the sense that the seller
does not return the premium or advance payment to the buyer if the latter does not exercise
the purchase option and the buyer loses the option premium even if the option is exercised
and the contract is confirmed. In the case of Bai‘ al ‘Arb ¯un, however, the option premium
is adjusted in the sale price when the contract is confirmed.
Samuel L. Hayes, after detailed discussion on derivatives, concludes:
“There are no effective derivates of Islamic debt contracts which replicate conventional risk-hedging
and leveraging contracts such as swaps, futures and options. Similarly, in the equity security sector,
there are no risk-hedging or leveraging contracts in Islamic finance truly comparable to available
conventional derivatives /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiWith respect to commodities and other goods, the Salam contract is
an imperfect Islamic substitute for a conventional forward contract. The related Istisna‘a contract
for goods being manufactured for a buyer provides another partial Islamic proxy for a forward
contract. It is also possible to construct an Islamic contract which partially replicates a conventional
futures contract, via back-to-back Salam contracts.”
The institutions dealing in derivatives and hedge funds claim that the diversity of hedging
products protects their clients against market volatility and provides a larger spectrum of
risk management to the benefit of society. But actually, volatility is caused by their activities
when they trade in derivatives and the clients are sold nothing for something – protection
against a danger that never needed to exist in the first place. They may produce huge profits
for financial institutions at the cost of others, but these profits are not necessarily indicative
of productive efforts. Mr Warren Buffet, Chairman of Berkshire Hathaway once said:
“Derivatives are financial weapons of mass destruction, mainly due to opaque pricing and accounting
policies in swaps, options and other complex products whose prices are not listed on exchanges;
credit derivatives and total return swaps that are agreements to guarantee counterparty against
default or bankruptcy merit special concern.” 28
The macroeconomic arguments for their existence are not convincing either – they are for
minimizing risks which do not need to exist. The global foreign exchange market at present
is more or less an unproductive pursuit in that it exists because of an unnecessary monetary
27 For details see Vogel and Hayes, 1998, pp. 156–164, 220–232, 281, 282.
28 Buffet, 2003.


----- p.211 (pdf 239) -----


Overview of Financial Institutions and Products 211
expansion. It would be better to structure the financial system such that it did not suffer
from continuing volatility. What we are seeing in the Western world is the emergence of
financial products that are a symptom of a system that has gone wrong. For a more efficient
economy, we must promote systems in which people work in productive pursuits rather than
unproductive ones. As El-Gamal states:
“Change the system to relate it with real sector activities and all those clever dealers who earn huge
profits out of thin air could become doctors, industrialists, business people and teachers instead!
As such, Islamic financiers who look at the products of this system as a paradigm seem to be at
mistake.”29
Study of the behaviour of the derivatives market reveals that it has the potential to cause
a serious breakdown in the financial system. The degrees of leverage that are afforded by
option contracts can be so high that large unpredictable market moves in underlying prices
may one day lead to the insolvency of major financial institutions. Liabilities cannot be
perfectly hedged, even if that is the intention, and some traders deliberately do not hedge
their option portfolios because such action would limit the potential for high returns. The
case of Long Term Capital Management in the United States, rescued by a Federal Reserve
bail out in 1998, demonstrates the degree of risk that can be incurred. The question is
whether the central bank or other authorities would be able to move quickly enough, or in
large enough measure, to prevent possible failings.
For example, collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) are a sophisticated type of derivative
and a clever way of exploiting anomalies in credit ratings. A number of loans or debt
securities payable by various companies are put into a pool, and new securities are issued
which pay out according to the pool’s collective performance. The new securities are divided
into three (or more) levels of risk. The lowest, equity tranche, takes the first loss if any
companies in the pool default. If enough losses eat that up, the next, mezzanine level, suffers.
The most protected level, the senior tranche, would still be safe, unless the collective pool
has severe losses. It takes only a couple of defaults in a pool of 100 companies to destroy
the equity tranche. Downgrades of investment-grade corporate bonds in America were a
record 22 % in 2002 according to Moody’s, and it recorded bond defaults of $160 billion
worldwide. The equity and mezzanine tranches of many CDOs suffered severe losses; some
were wiped out. Even senior tranches, usually rated AAA, have been downgraded because
losses may yet reach them. 30 Thus, the whole concept of CDOs as in vogue refers to absolute
risk and exploitation, which is unacceptable in Islamic finance.
8.9 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
Banking and non-banking financial institutions can operate as indirect and direct intermedi-
aries, respectively, in the Islamic framework. The instrument of “interest” will be replaced
by a set of instruments comprising risk-based profit/loss sharing ratios and profit margins
in trading and leasing activities. IFIs, in order to get legitimate profit/earnings, will have to
take up liability, undertake risk and add value through trading and leasing transactions and
services.
29 El-Gamal, comment made on his personal web site: http://www.ruf.rice.edu/ ∼ elgamal.
30 The Economist , London, 15th March, 2003.


----- p.212 (pdf 240) -----


212 Understanding Islamic Finance
The markets that can function in the Islamic financial framework include both money
and capital markets, equity markets, limited forex markets, forward markets and investment
Sukuk markets, representing a variety of instruments for fund and investment management
by Islamic financial institutions.
Providing Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant and feasible instruments for the functioning of Islamic
capital markets in the competitive global financial environment is the real challenge facing
scholars and practitioners of Islamic banking and finance. Of all the features of Islamic
financial instruments, one stands out distinctly, i.e. the instruments must be real asset-based.
While it is relatively easy for individual banks/financial institutions to securitize their asset-
based operations, development of instruments for financing government budget deficits is
a difficult task, mainly because the sovereigns needing finance do not have sufficient real
assets for conversion of debt stock into Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant securities. A beginning has been
made and Islamic banks and financial institutions in Bahrain, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, UAE,
Pakistan, Sudan and elsewhere in the world, including a number of non-Muslim countries like
the Philippines, Germany and Japan, are using a variety of instruments based on profit/loss
sharing, Ijarah and Salam. Ijarah has relatively greater potential, which needs to be realized.
Sudan has developed Shirkah-based instruments and other countries need to follow.
A variety of target-specific Sukuk can be issued on the basis of various modes, keeping
in mind the relevant Shar ¯ı´ah rules. This would require appropriate enabling laws to protect
the interests of investors and issuers, appropriate accounting standards, study of the targeted
market, monitoring of standardized contracts, appropriate flow of financial data to investors
and provision of a standard quality service to customers at large. In all of this, regulators
have to play a crucial role.
Governments, particularly in Islamic countries, may like to establish national mutual funds
or Mudarabah/leasing companies with the dual objective of developing Islamic financial mar-
kets and mobilizing financial resources for meeting financing requirements of public sector
and private sector corporations. These mutual funds may gradually replace the conventional
national savings schemes, treasury bills and other government bonds.
The Bahrain-based Liquidity Management Centre (LMC) and the International Islamic
Financial Market (IIFM) need to play a proactive role to coordinate the operations of Islamic
banks in the world. There could be an Islamic Liquidity Management Centre established
in all countries with the presence of Islamic financial institutions, which would serve as a
fund manager to manage and invest the excess liquidity of IFIs working in the respective
jurisdictions. The process having started, likely problems can be resolved by means of trial
and error, and necessary reforms can be introduced accordingly.

