
----- p.213 (pdf 241) -----


9
Murabaha and Musawamah
9.1 INTRODUCTION
Trading is one of the most common activities of Islamic banks. While conventional banks
simply finance trading businesses by providing funds, Islamic banks have to be involved
in the sale and purchase process for goods according to the trading rules prescribed by the
Shar¯ı´ah. They are entitled to profit by undertaking business risk like real sector businesses.
However, Islamic banks’ trading pattern is different from the general trading business.
Banks’ clients normally need a credit facility and the banks are selling goods on credit and
thus creating receivables. Credit sale (Bai‘ Mu´ajjal) may take a number of forms, important
among which are:
1. Musawamah, or normal sale, in which parties bargain on price, a sale is executed and
goods delivered while payment is deferred.
2. Murabaha, a “cost-plus sale”, in which parties bargain on the margin of profit over the
known cost price. The seller has to reveal the cost-incurred by him for acquisition of the
goods and provide all cost-related information to the buyer.
Experts in Islamic economics and finance generally advise the use of profit/loss sharing
modes and discourage extensive use of Murabaha or other trading modes. But, as its permis-
sibility is beyond doubt and all Islamic banks operating in the world are using this technique
excessively as an alternative to the conventional modes of credit, studying Murabaha from
the point of view of Islamic banking is crucial, and hence is the subject of the present
chapter.
The technique of Murabaha that is currently being used in Islamic banking is something
different from the classical Murabaha used in normal trade. This transaction is concluded
with a prior promise to buy or a request made by a person interested in acquiring goods on
credit from any financial institution. As such, it is called “Murabaha to Purchase Orderer”
(MPO). The AAOIFI’s Shar¯ı´ah Standard on Murabaha is also based on this arrangement. We
shall discuss the general rules of Murabaha and various structures that financial institutions
can adopt for sale to help their clients.
Various aspects to be discussed in this regard include the nature of Murabaha as we find
in classical literature on Islamic jurisprudence, the sorts of goods eligible for selling through
Murabaha on credit, disclosure to the buyer by the seller, combining other contracts or
subcontracts for Murabaha arrangements by Islamic banks, the concept of Khiyar (option to
rescind the sale) and possible defects in the object of sale, prepayment or late payment by the
client, the possibility of liquidated damages/solatium to banks and the modern application
of Murabaha along with issues involved. Fixity of price, taking ownership, risk related to


----- p.214 (pdf 242) -----


214 Understanding Islamic Finance
ownership and possession 1 of the object of contract by the bank before sale to the client,
timings of Murabaha execution and the principles regarding Murabaha receivables need
more focus for their impact on Shar ¯ı´ah compliance.
9.2 CONDITIONS OF VALID BAI‘
The conditions and rules for a lawful sale transaction have been described in detail in
Chapter 6. Keeping in mind the importance given by Islamic banks to Murabaha, we give
below a recap on the salient features and conditions for a valid sale:
1. The people uttering offer and acceptance in respect of a valid sale should be qualified
to enter into the contracts.
2. The sale should take place with free and mutual consent of the seller and the purchaser.
3. Offer and acceptance must include certainty of price, certainty of date and place of
delivery and certainty about the time of payment of the price.
4. The seller should be either the owner of the object of sale (Mabi‘) or an agent of the
owner.
5. The Mabi‘ should be alienable. Transfer of title requires acquisition of title by the
purchaser, which implies assuming the risks related to ownership, including the risk
of damage, destruction, pilferage or theft, the risk of obsolescence and the price or
market risk.
6. The subject of sale must exist at the time of sale; as such, one cannot sell the unborn
calf of one’s cow, or a bank cannot execute Murabaha on goods that have already been
consumed or used.
7. The Mabi‘ should be well-defined and in the ownership of the seller. Hence, what is not
owned by the seller cannot be sold; for example, A sells to B a car which he intends to
purchase from C (still owned by C) Since the car is not owned by A at the time of sale,
the sale is void.
8. The subject of sale must be in the physical or constructive possession of the seller at
the time of sale. 2 Constructive possession means that the buyer has not taken physical
delivery of the goods, but the ownership risk of the goods has been transferred to him:
the goods are under his control and all rights and liabilities of the goods have passed
on to him. For example, A has purchased a car from B, B has not physically handed
over the car to A but has placed it in a garage which is in the control of A, who has
free access to it – the risk of the car has practically passed on to him, the car is in the
“constructive possession” of A and he can sell the car to any third party.
9. Sale must be instant and absolut e – a sale attributed to a future date or a sale contingent
on a future event is void. For example, A says to B on 1st of January: “I sell my car to
you on the 1st of February”. The sale is void, because it is contingent on a future event.
He can give an understanding or a promise, but the sale will have to be executed on 1st
February, and it is only then that rights and liabilities will emerge.
1 Ownership as distinct from possession; while possession can also be constructive, the sale of unowned goods, even if existent, is
unanimously prohibited, except in the case of Salam.
2 This is based on a number of traditions of the holy Prophet, as discussed in Chapter 6. However, constructive possession is
sufficient, as widely accepted by the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars. The journal Al-Iqtisad al-Islami of Dubai Islamic Bank reported as for back
as in 1984 that possession by the banks is completed when the vendor sets it aside for it, particularly when the bank concerned is
liable to bear the loss of damage to the commodity before its delivery to the buyer ( Al-Iqtisad-al-Islami, March, 1984).


----- p.215 (pdf 243) -----


Murabaha and Musawamah 215
10. The subject of sale should be lawful and an object of value. A thing having no value
according to the usage of trade cannot be sold; similarly, the subject of sale should not
be a thing used for any prohibited purpose, e.g. pork, wine, etc.
11. The subject of sale should be specifically known and identified to the buyer, i.e. it must
be identified by pointing out or by detailed specifications so as to distinguish it from
other units of goods not sold. For example, A says to B: “I sell 100 cotton bales out
of the bales lying in that building”, if A does not identify the bales, the sale is void,
because in the case of loss to the cotton, it would be difficult to ascertain who suffered
how much loss.
12. The delivery of the sold commodity to the buyer should be certain and should not
depend on a contingency or chance. For example, if A sells his car, which has been
snatched, to a person in the hope that he will manage to get it back, the sale is void.
13. A certain price is stipulated once and for all. For example, A says to B: “If you pay in
one month, the price is $50 and if in two months, the price will be $55”; as the price
is uncertain, the sale is void. A can give the two options to B, but B must select one
option to have one definite price to validate the sale.
14. The sale must be unconditional. A conditional sale is invalid, unless the condition is a
part of any usual practice of trade not expressly prohibited by the Shar ¯ı´ah.
There are also certain other conditions which are applicable to each form of sale separately.
The conditions related to Bai‘ Murabaha are discussed below.
9.3 MURABAH A – A BAI‘ AL AM ¯ANAH
For the purpose of this chapter, forms of Bai‘ can be described from the point of view of the cost
of any item to the seller – we may call it the original cost. Since the original cost or purchase price
is the starting point in Bai‘ Murabaha, it is appropriate to refer briefly to all such lawful forms of
Bai‘ which become effective with express mention of the original cost. Such a classification of
Bai‘ includes Tawliyah, Wadhi‘ah or Mohatah and Murabaha. These forms require an honest
declaration of the cost by the seller and as such are referred to in the Fiqh literature as Buyoo‘ al
Am¯an¯at (fiduciary sales).3 Among fiduciary sales, Tawliyah means resale at the stated original
price with no profit or loss to the seller. Wadhi‘ah or Mohatah means resale at a discount from the
original cost. The last one, Murabaha, is sale with a fixed profit margin over the cost. Another,
and the most common, form is Bai‘ Musawamah, which is an ordinary sale and signifies sale
for a price which is mutually agreed upon between the seller and the purchaser without any
reference to the purchase price/cost to the seller. In other words, it refers to bargaining on price
of the commodity being traded. All these forms could be either on a spot or deferred payment
basis. While in Musawamah the parties freely agree on the price, in Murabaha the seller informs
the buyer of his original cost and the parties agree on a stipulated profit to be added to that cost.
9.4 BAI‘ MURABAHA IN CLASSICAL LITERATURE
Murabaha is derived from Ribh, which means gain, profit or addition. In Murabaha, a seller
has to reveal his cost and the contract takes place at an agreed margin of profit. This contract
3 Al Jaziri, 1973, p. 300.


----- p.216 (pdf 244) -----


216 Understanding Islamic Finance
was practised in pre-Islamic times. Imam Malik has mentioned this sale in Al-Mu’watta –
the first formally coded book on traditions of the holy Prophet (pbuh). A renowned Hanafi
jurist Al-Marghinani has defined Murabaha as “the sale of anything for the price at which it
was purchased by the seller and an addition of a fixed sum by way of profit”. 4 Ibn Qudama,
a Hanbali jurist, has defined it as “the sale at capital cost plus a known profit; the knowledge
of capital cost is a precondition in it. Thus the seller should say: ‘My capital involved in
this deal is so much or this thing has cost me (Dm) 100 and I sell it to you for this cost plus
a profit of (Dm) 10’. This is lawful without any controversy among the jurists”. 5
According to Imam Malik, Murabaha is conducted and completed by exchanging goods
and price including a mutually agreed profit margin, then and there. 6 It is important to
observe that to him, no credit is involved in Murabaha. Malikis as a whole do not like this
sale as it requires so many conditions, the fulfilment of which is very difficult. However,
they do not prohibit it. 7
Imam Shaf’ie in Kitabul Umm expanded this concept to include credit transactions. It has
been defined in similar words in other books of Fiqh. 8
By definition, therefore, it is basic for a valid Murabaha that the buyer must know the
original price, additional expenses if any and the amount of profit. Accordingly, Murabaha
is a contract of trustworthiness. 9
9.5 THE NEED FOR MURABAHA
Actually, Murabaha is meant for some restricted situations. Al-Marghinani has suggested
that the purpose of Murabaha (and Tawliyah) is the protection of innocent consumers lacking
expertise in trade from the tricks and stratagems of cunning traders. 10 A person who lacks
skill in making purchases in the market on the basis of Musawamah is obliged to have
recourse to a Murabaha dealer who is known for his honesty in this particular type of trade,
and thus purchases the article from that person by paying him an agreed addition over the
original purchase price. This leaves the actual buyer satisfied and secure from the fraud to
which he was exposed for want of skill. Hence, it is evident that the main purpose of this
form of Bai‘ is to protect innocent purchasers from exploitation by cunning traders.
Imam Ahmad prefers ordinary sale over Murabaha in the following words:
“To me, ordinary sale (Musawamah) is easier than Murabaha, because Murabaha implies a trust
(reposed in the seller) and seeking of ease on behalf of the buyer, and it also requires detailed
description to the buyer; there is every likelihood that selfishness may overcome the seller, per-
suading him to give a false statement or that mistake may occur which makes it exploitation and
fraud. Avoidance of such a situation is, therefore, much better and preferable”. 11
The same ideas have been expressed by a Jafari jurist on the authority of Imam Hussain
ibn Ali. 12 After basing the sale price on the original cost of the goods to the seller, the
4 Al-Marghinani, 1957, p. 282.
5 Ibn Qudama, 1958, 4, p. 179; Al Jaziri, 1973, pp. 559–564.
6 Malik, 1985, pp. 424, 425.
7 Al Jaziri, 1973, p. 559.
8 Al-Hilli, 1389 AH, p. 40.
9 Al-Kasani, 1993, 5, p. 223, cf. Hassan, 1993, p. 95.
10 Al-Marghinani, 1957, p. 282.
11 Ibn Qudama, 1367 AH, p. 187.
12 Al-Kulayni, 1278 AH, p. 197.


----- p.217 (pdf 245) -----


Murabaha and Musawamah 217
purchaser is provided with a modicum of protection against unjust exploitation by unscrupu-
lous merchants. 13
It is important to observe, however, that modern Murabaha is conducted mainly by banks
and financial institutions on a deferred payment basis. Upon execution of Murabaha, a
receivable is created that becomes the liability of the customer. The aspect of disclosing
details of the banks’ cost price, though a necessary condition of Murabaha, does not remain
a serious issue between the parties, particularly in view of the fact that the customer himself
is involved one way or the other in locating and purchasing the goods.
9.6 SPECIFIC CONDITIONS OF MURABAHA
It is quite obvious that a transaction under Murabaha should meet all the general conditions
applicable to an ordinary sale. The specific conditions regarding lawful transactions of
Murabaha pertain to the goods subject to Murabaha, the original price paid by the seller, any
additional costs to compute the total costs serving as the basis of Murabaha and the margin
of profit charged on the cost so determined. An account of these conditions follows:
1. Goods to be traded should be real, but not necessarily tangible. Rights and royalties are
examples of nontangibles that can be traded through Murabaha, as they have value, are
owned and can be sold on credit.
2. Any currency and monetary units that are subject to the rules of Bai‘ al Sarf cannot be
sold through Murabaha, because currencies have to be exchanged simultaneously. 14
3. Similarly, credit documents that represent debt owed by someone cannot be the subject
of Murabaha, first because debt cannot be sold except when it is subject to the rules of
Hawalah and second because any profit taken on the debt would be Riba.
4. The seller must state the original price and the additional expenses incurred on the sale
item and he must be just and true to his words. The additional expenses such as transport,
processing and packing charges, etc. that enhance the value of the commodity in any
way, and that are added as a custom by the merchant community in the original price, can
be added into the purchase price to form the basis of Murabaha. It is, however, requisite
that the seller, in making or including such an addition, should say: “This article has
cost me so much”, and not: “I have purchased this at such a rate,” because the latter
assertion would be false. 15 The traditional jurists had some differences in this regard. The
Hanafi school permits the seller to include in the base price of Murabaha all expenses
he has incurred in relation to it, which have somehow modified the object (tailoring,
dyeing for cloth) and those which have not modified it but were nevertheless incurred
for the object’s sake (transportation, storage costs, commission). 16 The Malikis divide
the expenses into three groups: expenses that directly affect the object of the sale and
that can be added to the base price of the object; expenses that are incurred after the
profit has been calculated and do not directly alter the sale object, like services which
the seller might not have provided himself (transportation and storage expenses), which
can also be added and expenses which represent the services that the seller could have
13 Udovitch, 1970, p. 220.
14 Al-Jaziri, 1973, p. 564; AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 128.
15 Al-Marghinani, 1957, p. 282; Shaybani, 1953, pp. 155, 156.
16 Al-Jaziri, 1973, pp. 564, 565; Saleh, 1986, p. 96.


----- p.218 (pdf 246) -----


218 Understanding Islamic Finance
provided himself but did not provide, such as packing charges, sales commission, etc. –
these cannot be added. 17 According to Shafi‘es also, the expenses of the last category
cannot be added to the cost. The Hanbalis’ view is more pragmatic, according to which
all expenses can be added with mutual consent, provided the buyer is informed about the
break-down of these expenses. 18
5. The prospective seller in Murabaha is required to disclose all aspects relating to the
commodity, any defects or additional benefits and the mode of payment to the original
seller/supplier. All schools of thought are unanimous on the point that the buyer in
Murabaha ought to be informed if the original price was on credit, since credit prices are
often higher than cash prices. All also agree that the original purchase price deliberately
inflated violates the concept of Murabaha. If an Islamic bank receives a rebate for goods
purchased, even after the Murabaha sale of such a contract, the client/buyer is entitled to
benefit from the rebate as well. 19
6. The margin of profit on the price so reached has to be mutually agreed upon between
buyer and seller. The price, once fixed as per agreement and deferred, cannot be further
increased except for rebate received from the supplier as mentioned above.
7. Any Majhul (unspecified) price cannot become a basis for Murabaha, as it involves the
semblance of uncertainty which renders Murabaha sale unlawful. 20 It is, therefore, a
prerequisite that the price or cost paid by the seller must be expressed in identical units,
such as dirhams and dinars, or specific articles of weight or measurement; because if the
original price is an article of which all the units are not similar, the exact price at which
the original buyer has become owner of the article will remain unknown.
8. If the seller gives an incorrect statement about the original price/cost of goods, the buyer,
according to Imam Malik, may rescind the sale unless the seller returns to him the
difference between his real and the stated cost, in which case the sale is binding. The
Hanafis give the buyer the unqualified option to rescind, while the Hanbalis consider the
sale binding after the return of the difference between the correct and the stated costs.
The Shafi‘es have two versions, one of which agrees with the Hanbalis and the other
with the Hanafis. 21
9. The purchaser in Murabaha has the right of option, even in the absence of this condition
or its stipulation in the contract. If he discovers that the seller has defrauded him by false
statement regarding particulars of the article, its price, additional expenses or if the seller
himself has bought the commodity on a deferred payment basis and sold it on prompt
payment without informing him, or if any practice on the part of the seller involves the
semblance of illegal sale, the purchaser will be at liberty either to accept or reject the
bargain as he pleases. 22 If, however, the purchaser detects cheating after he has used
that commodity or it has been destroyed in his hands, he is not entitled to make any
deduction from the price according to Imam Abu Hanifa and his disciple Muhammad,
because the commodity against which he has to practise his right of option does not exist.
17 Ibn Rushd, 1950, 2, p. 217.
18 See Saleh, 1986, p. 96.
19 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clause 4/5, p. 120; See also Saleh, 1986, p. 96.
20 Al-Marghinani, 1957, p. 285.
21 Ibn Rushd, 1950, 2, p. 218; cf. Ray, 1995, p. 44.
22 Ibn Qudama, 1369 AH, 13,p .7 8 .


----- p.219 (pdf 247) -----


Murabaha and Musawamah 219
According to Abu Yusuf and Ibn-abi-Laila, also Hanafi, deduction will be made even
after the destruction of the commodity. 23
The message we get from the above is that Murabaha is a lawful kind of sale but has
its own limitations. The Medieval Murabaha was not a mode of financing, it was a kind
of trade. Contemporary jurists have accepted it as a mode of business and an alternative to
financing with certain limitations. These relate to the level of transparency and justice which
Islam ordains for commercial activities. It is in view of this requirement that Maliki fuqaha
consider this form of sale Naqis (defective). This means that the permissibility of Murabaha
is not as absolute as is the case of ordinary sale. 24
There is no doubt that jurists have justified Murabaha on the grounds that it provides
protection to the innocent, unskilled and inexperienced purchasers, but as we do not find
any reference regarding its prohibition for experienced people or traders, it can therefore be
adopted subject to the fulfilment of the juristic conditions, as an alternative to interest-bearing
transactions for those activities which the Shar¯ı´ah boards of various banks may allow.25
9.6.1 Bai‘ Murabaha and Credit Sale (Murabaha–Mu’ajjal)
Murabaha as an alternative to interest-based financial transactions assumes importance only
when it is transacted on a deferred payment basis. This, therefore, calls for a study of the
concept of postponement of payment in Murabaha. The terms of payment in the classical
Murabaha did not necessarily involve credit; they could be either cash or credit. It may,
however, be pointed out that the legality of postponement of payment is one of the general
features of lawful sales – termed Bai‘ Mu’ajjal, which refers to sale of goods or prop-
erty against deferred payment (either in a lump sum or instalments). 26 Bunched with the
Murabaha, Bai‘ Mu’ajjal would mean sale with an agreed profit margin over the cost price
along with deferred payment.
In Hidaya, permission for credit sale has been described thus:
“A sale is valid either for ready money or for a future payment provided the period be fixed,
because of the words of the Holy Qur’ ¯an ‘Trading is lawful’ and also because there is a tradition
of the holy Prophet (peace be upon him) who purchased a garment from a Jew, and promised to
pay the price at a fixed future date by pledging his iron breast-coat. It is indispensably a requisite
of business but the period of payment should be fixed. Uncertainty in the period of repayment may
occasion a dispute and jeopardize the execution of the transaction since the seller would naturally
like to demand the payment of the price as soon as possible, and the buyer would desire to defer
it.”27
The substitution of prompt payment by deferred payment has been justified on the grounds
that upon execution of the transaction, the receipt of the agreed price becomes the sole
23 Al-Sarakhsi, n.d., 13,p .8 6 .
24 Al Jaziri, 1973, p. 559.
25 For details see Council of Islamic Ideology, 1980, pp. 15, 16, 34, 35, 38, 42–46; the CII has described the detailed application
of this mode in the chapter on “Commercial Banking”. According to the CII, it can be used both for “fixed investment financing”
and “working capital requirements” of parties (pp. 34, 38). Farmers’ short-term fund requirements, particularly for the purchase of
inputs like seed, fertilizer and pesticides and for plough cattle, tractors and tubewells can be met through Murabaha (pp. 34–45). The
commerce sector can also be financed through this mode (pp. 45 and 46). As regards mining, quarrying, electricity, gas, water and
services, this technique may be used for financing the purchase of capital goods and machinery (pp. 46–47). In the field of personal
consumption, consumer durables can be financed on a Murabaha–Mu’ajjal basis.
26 Majallah al Ahkam refers to Bai‘ al Mujjal as Bai‘ bil Nasiah or bi al T’ ajil wa al Taqsit (Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Articles 245–251).
27 Al-Marghinani, 1957, p. 242.


----- p.220 (pdf 248) -----


220 Understanding Islamic Finance
right of the seller. It is, therefore, within his discretion to postpone it for the convenience
and ease of the purchaser. The fact is that he is empowered even to forego it altogether. 28
Delay in payment under Murabaha is also allowed in other schools of Fiqh, including
Shiaites.29
As described in detail in Chapter 6, jurists slightly differ on the aspect of different cash
and credit prices. The Hanafis, Shafi‘es and Hanbalis permit the difference between cash
and credit prices provided one price is settled at the finalization of the contract. Although
Imam Malik himself forbade it, some of the Malikis hold a different view and allow it.
Contemporary jurists are almost unanimous on the legality of this difference. The rationale
behind this viewpoint is that exchange in respect of a loan wherein any excess is prohibited
occurs between a commodity and its like, while in credit sale, one of the counter values is
the money and the other any goods of trade. As, for example, in loan transactions, $100 can
only be exchanged for $100 or a ton of wheat for a ton of wheat. Any increase in the mutual
exchange, therefore, is Riba. In the case of credit sale, exchange has to take place between
two different commodities. First, money is exchanged for goods and then goods are sold
against money. Therefore, the difference between the purchase price and sale price does not
amount to Riba. 30
Further, interest charged on a loan is payable to the lender in any case. In a sale contract,
this is not so because the prices are liable to change. If the price rises, the purchaser gains
because he purchased a good on a deferred payment basis at a cheaper price, but if the price
drops, the seller gains because he succeeded in selling the item purchased on a deferred
payment basis at a higher price. Bai‘ bi Thaman al-’ Ajil or Bai‘ Mu‘ajjal is, therefore, in
conformity with the Fiqhi principle “Al-Ghunm bil Ghurm”, i.e. profit goes with loss. 31
However, the sale contract has to be finalized at one price so that the exact liability is known
to the parties. This would practically imply that the whole price is in return of the sale
item.32
However, it is not allowed to conduct Murabaha on a deferred payment basis in the case of
gold, silver or currencies, because all monetary units are subject to the rules of Bai‘ al Sarf.
Similarly, receivables or debt instruments cannot become the subject matter of Murabaha,
as any profit over the principal of a debt is Riba. 33 However, Murabaha of shares of joint
stock companies eligible on the basis of screening criteria is allowed.
9.7 POSSIBLE STRUCTURES OF MURABAHA
Trading and other real sector business activities require specific expertise, which bankers may
or may not have. Further, it is not possible for banks to train all staff in trading, marketing
and other real sector activities required for Islamic banking practices. One possible solution
is that banks may establish specific purpose companies to undertake trading (and leasing)
activities and the staff with relevant specialized expertise may be entrusted the job of trading
in goods so as to fulfil the Shar ¯ı´ah essentials of Murabaha–Mu’ajjal. Those companies
28 Al-Marghinani, 1957, p. 288.
29 Al-Hilli, 1389 AH, p. 41.
30 Nooruddin, 1977, p. 125.
31 Nooruddin, 1977, p. 126.
32 Nooruddin, 1977, p. 134; Al-Sanani, 1972, pp. 136–137.
33 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Murabaha Standard, clause 2/2/6; pp. 114, 128.


----- p.221 (pdf 249) -----


Murabaha and Musawamah 221
would buy commodities and assets and sell them to their customers on the basis of deferred
payment. Thus, the banks’ specialized entities could use their entrepreneurial expertise, like
all other profit-seeking businesses, to earn profit. Otherwise, the trading activities may be
conducted either through the client as agent or through a third party agency. The options for
conducting Murabaha are briefly discussed below.
9.7.1 Direct Trading by Bank Management
Direct trading by bank officials is the most ideal option with respect to fulfilment of the
Murabaha essentials, but involving the bankers in retail trading business could lead to a lot
of managerial problems and open the floodgates to corruption. This issue can be resolved
through the introduction of effective internal controls. In the absence of such controls, this
structure could be used only in cases of selected specific assets, wherein banks could purchase
any high value asset or specific goods with trademarks in bulk for building inventory
and sell to its clients on a cost-plus basis. For example, a bank’s subsidiary dealing with
agricultural finance may purchase fertilizer/pesticides and provide them to farmers on the
basis of Murabaha through dealers. In such wholesale business, an additional benefit would
be that the bank’s sale price could be closer to the cash market price.
9.7.2 Bank Purchases Through a Third Party/Agent
One option in many cases may be to purchase goods through a third party agent to
maintain inventory or to purchase according to clients’ requests for Murabaha opera-
tions. This structure of Murabaha is most likely to accomplish the Shar ¯ı´ah requirement
of taking possession and commercial risk by the bank for the period between the pur-
chase of the assets from the supplier and their sale to the client on Murabaha. 34 After
purchase from the supplier, banks stand liable if anything goes wrong until handing the
asset over to the Murabaha clients. The customer cannot guarantee the risk of transporta-
tion of the goods because the safety of the goods is the responsibility of the owner,
that is, the bank. 35 Banks can mitigate this risk by stipulating to get delivery at their
godowns.
Banks may appoint qualified suppliers as agents for purchase according to their inventory-
creating plans or as and when required by their clients. For the latter arrangement, the
package would comprise (i) an MoU or agreement to sell – the client’s request and promise
that he will purchase the specified commodity from the bank; it may also include a stip-
ulation about the profit margin to be taken by the bank and, if possible, the sale price,
that will include the cost price, the contract price and the payment date(s); for the profit
margin, the bank may indicate at this stage any reference rate provided a definite price
is stipulated at the time of execution of Murabaha; 36 (ii) the sale deed executed at the
time when the commodity is in the ownership and risk of the bank; and (iii) the “promis-
sory note” signed by the client to the effect that he will pay the price of the goods
purchased on a specified date. In addition to this, the agreement may include clauses
about the security/collateral, description and quality of goods and the way out in case of
34 According to the AAOIFI standard, the option of a third party agent is better; it recommends that the customer should not be
appointed to act as agent for purchase of items for Murabaha except in situations of dire need (clause 3/1/3, p. 117).
35 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 129.
36 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 120.


----- p.222 (pdf 250) -----


222 Understanding Islamic Finance
defect in the goods and nonpayment by the client at the due date(s). According to the
AAOIFI Standard, a promissory note or other guarantee can be obtained from the cus-
tomer at the promise stage also. 37 Of course, it is better that promissory notes be obtained
after execution of the sale, because these generally contain the wording “against value
received”.
9.7.3 Murabaha Through the Client as Agent
The structure of trading through a client as the bank’s agent is the safest way for banks to
avoid commodity-based risks and related problems. But this arrangement is more likely to
make Murabaha transactions a back door to interest and, therefore, requires extra care to keep
it Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant. The foremost requirement is that goods come under the ownership
and risk of the bank. Further, the customer should explain to the supplier about his agency
status.38 If the bank does not purchase and own the items and only makes payment for
any goods directly purchased and received by the client from the supplier/vendor under
“Murabaha”, that will be a remittance of the amount of money on behalf of the client, which
shall be nothing but a loan to him and any profit on this amount shall be nothing but interest.
As Islamic banks are normally using this structure, we discuss it in detail.
9.8 MURABAHA TO PURCHASE ORDERER (MPO)
Modern Murabaha transactions by banks normally take the form of Murabaha to Purchase
Orderer (MPO) (Murabaha lil ‘amri bil Shira or ‘Murabaha li Wa‘da bi Shira), which is
an arrangement wherein the bank, upon request by the customer, purchases an asset from a
third party and sells the same to the customer on a deferred payment basis. This variant is
being widely used by almost all Islamic banks operating in various parts of the world and
by the Islamic Development Bank for its foreign trade-financing operations. The need for
MPO arises from the following factors:
1. Commercial banks, and likewise Islamic banks, do not normally undertake business where
they might be maintaining inventories of various goods; they do not want to become
grocers or traders because inventory storage, space and holding costs might be expensive.
2. It may not be possible for Islamic banks to purchase all items in advance for Murabaha
to their clients because the list of goods could be very long and there could be continuous
additions to the list.
3. The clients might be in need of specific quality goods and the banks might not be even
aware of the source of their availability. If banks keep similar items in inventory, these
might not be acceptable to the clients.
4. Regulators/central banks normally do not allow the banks to undertake trading as their
core business, with the dual purpose of keeping them liquid/saving them from the asset
and market risks related to goods and to avoid cartels and monopolies in the commodity
market. As such, most of the Islamic banks purchase only those goods for which they
receive requisition from their clients.
37 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 121.
38 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clause 3/1/1, pp. 117, 130.


----- p.223 (pdf 251) -----


Murabaha and Musawamah 223
On account of the above, Islamic banks have been allowed not necessarily to maintain
inventory of goods to be sold through Murabaha. According to the AAOIFI Shar ¯ı´ah Standard
on Murabaha, it is permissible for IFIs to purchase items only in response to their customers’
wish and application. But this wish may not be considered a promise or commitment by the
client to purchase the items, except when the promise has been made in the due form. 39 For
practical purposes, the promise can be incorporated into the requisition form to be submitted
by the client.
The customer can also indicate the supplier from whom the items/goods are to be purchased
by the bank. But the bank will have to ensure that the supplier is any third party and that
the client has not already purchased the item from that supplier or made a firm commitment
with him to purchase; otherwise it would be Bai‘ al ‘Inah and the transaction would be
non-Shar¯ı´ah-compliant. The bank can obtain a performance bond from the client to ensure
that the supplier identified by him will function in good faith and that the item provided
by him will be acceptable to the client. 40 Similarly, the bank is not allowed to enter into a
Musharakah arrangement with the client with the promise that one of the parties will buy
the other’s share through Murabaha on either a spot or deferred payment basis. However,
the promise can be made by a partner to buy the other’s share at the market price or at a
mutually agreed price at the time of sale by means of a separate contract. 41
The above permission for MPO does not imply that IFIs cannot be involved in the
sale/purchase of goods or cannot create their inventories. Purchasing an item, taking its
possession and ownership along with risk and reward is a major requirement of Shar ¯ı´ah,
without which the transaction would not be valid. Murabaha cannot be used as a substitute
for a running finance facility, which provides cash for fulfilling various needs of the client.
If a bank does not keep inventory, it can purchase a commodity on a client’s request and
sell it to him on a cost-plus basis, but it will have to fulfil all the necessary conditions of
valid Bai‘ as well as additional conditions applicable to Murabaha.
Merchant banking has become one of the functions of even conventional banks. Therefore,
Islamic banks, in addition to conducting MPO, may like to establish specialized asset
management and trading companies as non-bank financial subsidiaries to undertake active
trading business by maintaining inventory of major items demanded by their clients. This
way, their profit margin may be higher and the customers may also be offered such items at
cheaper rates.
Banks can purchase the goods through any third person/agent and possess the goods
before resale. If the bank appoints the customer its agent to buy the commodity on its
behalf, the customer will first purchase the commodity on behalf of the bank and take its
possession as such. But payment should be made by the bank directly to the supplier. Double
agency, i.e. for making payment and for purchasing and taking delivery, should be avoided
because it may become a cause of misuse, making Murabaha a back door to interest. At
this stage, the commodity must remain at the risk of the financier, who is the seller in this
transaction. Thereafter, the client purchases the commodity from the financier for a deferred
price.42
39 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 113.
40 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Murabaha, clause 2/5/1, p. 116.
41 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Murabaha, pp. 113, 114, 116, 128; clauses 2/2/1 to 2/2/5 and 2/5.
42 Usmani, 2000a, p. 106; for principal’s ownership during agency, see Zuhayli, 2003, p. 674.


----- p.224 (pdf 252) -----


224 Understanding Islamic Finance
9.8.1 MP O – A Bunch of Contracts
Modern Murabaha also involves an agency relationship between the bank and any third
party or even the client. The Murabaha to Purchase Orderer in this form would comprise
three distinct contracts:
1. A master contract which defines the overall facility to be availed, followed by an agree-
ment to purchase or promise by the client to purchase the article when offered by the
bank. Instead of being a bilateral contract of forward sale, the “agreement to buy” is a
unilateral promise from the client which binds him and not the bank.
2. An agency contract whereby the agent, who could be a client or any third party, has to
purchase the item from the market or the supplier identified by the client and take its
possession on behalf of the bank; this should be separate from the Murabaha agreement. 43
3. The actual Murabaha contract. The actual Murabaha contract should be concluded when
the bank owns the concerned commodity.
Murabaha transactions that involve other contracts like promise, agency (Wakalah) and
credit along with an agreed rate of return for IFIs over the cost price lead to a number of
issues: should the promise be unilateral or bilateral, binding or nonbinding? What is the
remedy if the client backs out? What should be the sequencing of the various actions of the
bank and the client? When the actual Murabaha is to be executed, what happens if the client
makes early payment or delays in making payment of the settled price? To what extent can
the bank’s loss be covered and mitigated? And last, but not least, what structure and modus
operandi of Murabaha can be adopted to fulfil the needs of various stakeholders along with
ensuring Shar¯ı´ah compliance? We discuss these matters in the following sections.
9.8.2 Promise to Purchase in Murabaha
According to classical Fiqh rules, mere promises are not binding and cannot be compelled
by the process of law. Although fulfilling a promise is advisable and violation reproachable,
it is neither mandatory nor enforceable through the courts. 44 However, to many other jurists,
promise can be enforced through courts of law. The third view (of some Maliki jurists) is
that promise is not binding in normal conditions, but if the promisor has caused the promisee
to incur some expenses or undertake some labour or liability on the basis of a promise, it is
mandatory on him to fulfil his promise for which he may be compelled by the courts.
Shaikh Muhammad Taqi Usmani, after detailed discussion on the subject, contends:
“Therefore, it is evident from these injunctions that fulfilling promise is obligatory. However,
the question whether or not a promise is enforceable in courts depends on the nature of the
promise. /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiBut in commercial dealings, where a party has given an absolute promise to sell or
purchase something and the other party has incurred liabilities on that basis, there is no reason why
such a promise should not be enforced. Therefore, on the basis of the clear injunctions of Islam,
if the parties have agreed that this particular promise will be binding on the promisor, it will be
enforceable. If the promisor backs out of his promise, a court or any arbitration may force him
either to purchase the commodity or pay actual damages to the promisee seller. The actual damages
will include the actual monetary loss suffered by him, but will not include the opportunity cost”. 45
43 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Murabaha, p. 130.
44 This is the view of Imam Abu Hanifa, Imam Shafi‘e, Imam Ahmad and of some Maliki jurists, cf. Usmani, 2000a, pp. 121, 122.
45 Usmani, 2000a, pp. 125, 126; Resolution Nos. 2 and 3, 5th session of the Islamic Fiqh Academy.


----- p.225 (pdf 253) -----


Murabaha and Musawamah 225
This aspect has been discussed in detail in Chapter 5, with the conclusion that if the parties
agree that the promise should be binding, it will be legally enforceable; and if the promisee
has incurred expenses as a result of the promise, the promisor will have to make up the loss
incurred by the promisee. A client asks a bank to purchase certain goods on the basis of
Murabaha according to his specifications from a supplier and promises that, after the bank
acquires the goods, he will purchase them from the bank on a cost-plus basis. In a case of
the breach of promise by the client, the bank may suffer loss while trying to return or to
dispose of the purchased goods. To overcome this problem, scholars have issued a verdict
that the promise of the customer to enter into the sale binds him, at least to the extent that
he should pay any actual loss, excluding the loss on account of conventional “opportunity
cost”, incurred by the bank as a consequence of its reliance on the promise. This is in line
with the AAOIFI’s Standard on Murabaha to Purchase Orderer. 46
Even a mutual promise (involving two parties) is permissible in the case of a Murabaha sale
provided the option (Khiyar) is given to one or both of the parties. Without such an option, it is
not permissible, since in a Murabaha sale, a mutual and binding promise is like an ordinary sale
contract, in which the prerequisite is that the seller should be in full possession of the goods to be
sold in order to be in conformity with the tenets of the Shar ¯ı´ah forbidding the sale of anything
that is not in one’s possession.47 A bank can also obtain Hamish Jiddiyah (earnest money) from
the client to ensure that the latter will buy the item when purchased.
In response to a purchase request by a client, a bank can enter into a purchase agreement
with the supplier, keeping for itself an option of return (Khiyaral-Shart) within a specified
period. This option will expire with actual sale to the customer. 48 Hence, an option (Khiyar)
can be used as a risk mitigation tool (asset risk) by an Islamic bank.
It must be kept in mind, however, that an actual sale must take place at the proper time
when the bank gets possession and ownership of the item by the exchange of offer and
acceptance.49 Mere promise itself should not be taken as a concluded sale.
9.8.3 MPO – The Customer as the Bank’s Agent to Buy and Related
Matters
The general structure of this variant of Murabaha is the following:
1. The customer approaches the bank with a request for the purchase of any commodity that
can be legally sold on credit.
2. The bank appoints the client its agent to purchase the item(s).
3. The bank purchases the commodity through the client as agent.
4. The bank makes payment to the vendor/supplier.
5. The customer takes delivery of the item on behalf of the bank as agent.
6. The customer makes an offer to purchase and the bank accepts the offer – the bank
transfers the title over to the customer upon execution of Murabaha.
7. The customer makes payment on a deferred basis without any rollover, discount or rebate.
46 The Fiqh Academy of the OIC and the AAOIFI accept this view; AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Murabaha, clause 4/2, pp. 119,
131; see also Vogel and Hayes, 1998, p. 126.
47 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, pp. 114, 115, 127, 128.
48 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, pp. 116, 129; clause 2/3/5 of Standard on Murabaha.
49 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Murabaha, clause 4/1.


----- p.226 (pdf 254) -----


226 Understanding Islamic Finance
The above structure involves the following stages/steps: pre-promise understanding;
promise stage; agency stage; acquiring possession; execution of Murabaha; post-execution
of Murabaha. Each of these steps is crucial in its own right and neglecting essentials of any
stage would render the whole arrangement unacceptable from the Shar ¯ı´ah angle:
1. The client and the bank sign an MoU or “agreement to sell”, 50 whereby the bank under-
takes to sell and the client promises to buy a commodity for a purchase price plus a profit
margin of X % that may or may not be tied with any benchmark, or a stipulated amount
over the known cost.
2. The bank appoints the client as its agent for purchasing the commodity on its behalf, and
both the parties sign an independent specific or general purpose agreement of agency.
3. The client purchases the commodity on behalf of the bank and takes its possession, for
which the bank makes payment to the vendor/supplier. This is obligatory according to
the AAOIFI Standard; 51 however, some Islamic banks do not follow this instruction due
to some procedural problems. The purchase order, material receiving report and delivery
challan, under whatever title, should be in the name of the bank. 52
4. The client informs the bank that he has purchased the commodity on its behalf, has taken
possession thereof, and makes an offer to purchase it from the bank at a profit margin
over the cost, as agreed to in the “agreement to sell”. This must be before the goods are
consumed, otherwise the Murabaha will be invalid.
5. The bank accepts the offer and the sale is concluded, whereby the ownership as well as
the risk of the commodity is transferred to the client.
The nature of the relationship in the above arrangement would be:
1. Bank and client: principal and agent.
2. Bank and client: promisor and promisee.
3. Bank and supplier: buyer and seller.
4. Bank and client: seller and buyer.
5. Bank and client: creditor and debtor.
Prerequisites of the various stages of MPO with the client working as agent are discussed
below.
Pre-Promise Stage – Facility Approval
The following points have to be kept in mind while approving the facility: it is essential
that the transaction between the bank and the client must be genuine, involving the trade
of goods. Murabaha cannot be used for providing liquidity or for cash financing. At the
time of facility approval, banks should ensure that the client needs some goods. Further, this
should exclude any prior contractual relationship between the client and the supplier whom
the client is indicating for supply of the goods. It is not permissible to transfer a contract that
has already been executed between the client and the supplier because this is tantamount to
Bai‘ al ‘Inah, which is prohibited. However, if any such prior understanding has not been
50 This is different from the “sale agreement” in which ownership rights are transferred to the buyer upon signing of the agreement.
In an “agreement to sell”, a promise is made to sell any commodity in the future and it does not involve conveyance of the
ownership rights.
51 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Murabaha, clause 3/1/4, pp. 117, 118.
52 Usmani, 2000a, pp. 107, 108.


----- p.227 (pdf 255) -----


Murabaha and Musawamah 227
finalized, the bank can enter into an Murabaha arrangement. The bank must also ensure that
the supplier or the party from whom the item is being purchased is a third party and not the
customer, his agent or any entity with more than 50 % ownership by the customer.
The nature of the required commodity should be in the scope of valid Murabaha.
Commodities that are subject to the rules of Bai‘ al Sarf, like gold, silver and currencies, are
not valid for Murabaha, because in such commodities and monetary units, exchange has to
be hand to hand. 53 The bank should also analyse the nature of goods from a risk management
point of view, their marketing, any uniqueness that could affect their profitability and the
cash flow and risk profile of the client.
Promise Stage – Master Murabaha Facility Agreement
After the initial analysis of the customer’s request, the bank will enter into a master Murabaha
facility agreement, or MoU, in which the limit of the facility, the nature of the commodity,
the profit margin to be taken by the bank, the schedule of payment, the security to be
submitted by the customer and other terms and conditions will be mutually stipulated. On the
basis of one MoU there could be a number of consignments for purchase of the asset from
time to time under sub-Murabahas. The MoU should also include specimens of purchase
requisition, a delivery report, a promissory note and the nature of collateral required. If both
parties agree, the agency agreement can also be signed at this stage.
Purchase Requisition
As per the MoU, the client will submit a requisition to the bank to purchase the commodity
as per his specifications. The requisition will contain details of the goods required to be
purchased from the bank and if possible the name of the supplier, cost price and the expected
date of delivery. Also at this stage, the bank should ensure that the goods are not already
owned by the client, otherwise the Shar ¯ı´ah advisor might ask the bank to credit the income
from this transaction to the Charity Account. The customer will also give an undertaking to
the bank that he will buy the goods which the bank will acquire on his request. Normally, a
purchase requisition contains this promise. If the supplier is nominated by the client himself,
the bank may demand a performance bond or guarantee for good performance to the effect
that the goods provided by the supplier indicated by the client will be acceptable to him.
Earnest money (Hamish Jiddiyah) can be demanded from the customer to assess his
sincerity to purchase the goods and as a security deposit. If the bank purchases the goods
and the client backs out and does not purchase, the bank may sell the goods in the market
and recover the actual loss, if any, from the Hamish Jiddiyah. However, the bank cannot
recover the conventional “cost of funds” or liquidated damages in the form of “opportunity
cost”.54
For purchasing the commodity it is advisable that the bank makes payment directly to the
supplier to ensure that the funds are used for the actual purpose. Experience has shown that
if funds are given to the client, there is a chance of misutilization that could also involve
non-Shar¯ı´ah-compliance. Advance payment can also be made to the supplier, and in this
case, the bank would charge a higher profit margin than the case of post-supply payment.
53 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Murabaha, clause 2/2/6, pp. 114, 128.
54 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Murabaha, clause 4/2, p. 119.


----- p.228 (pdf 256) -----


228 Understanding Islamic Finance
Agency Stage
An agency agreement can be signed side by side with the signing of an MoU. But it should
invariably be before the purchase of goods by the client. If the client purchases the goods
before the agency agreement, it would mean the goods are already owned by him and the
transaction would become Bai‘ al ‘Inah, which is prohibited. An agency agreement could
be “specific agency”, when the purchase of the commodity is not of a consistent nature, or
“general”, when the purchase of the commodity is of a consistent nature.
Purchasing Stage
The client should purchase the goods as the agent of the bank and as per the specifications
already decided. A number of situations could evolve at this stage. If the cost price is already
given and the supplier gives some rebate, it should be passed on to the client at the time of
execution of the Murabaha sale by reducing the cost of sale. If there is a rise in prices and the
amount escalates from the amount agreed in the Murabaha limit, the bank or the principal
must be informed in order to make a decision on whether to accept it or not. The bank has
the right to reject the purchase if made at other than the agreed price. If the goods to be
purchased are different from those given in the agency agreement, the change of commodity
can be made with mutual consent. Normally, banks indicate a time within which purchase
has to be made and if there is a delay, the bank may ask the client to refund the cost of
goods without any opportunity cost.
Acquisition of Title and Possession of the Asset
For Shar ¯ı´ah compliance, it is necessary that the bank takes ownership and actual or con-
structive possession of the goods before the execution of Murabaha. The forms of taking
possession of items differ according to their nature and customs. The requirement from the
Shar¯ı´ah angle is that the goods must come under the responsibility and risk of the bank.
The Islamic Fiqh Academy of the OIC resolved, in its sixth session, in respect of the forms
of “possession”:
“Just as the possession of commodities may be physical, by taking the commodity in one’s hand or
measuring or weighing the eatables, or by transferring or delivering the commodity to the premises
of the buyer, the possession may also be an implied or constructive possession, which takes place
by leaving the commodity at one’s disposal and enabling him to deal with it as he wishes. This
will be deemed a valid possession, even though the physical possession has not taken place. As for
the mode of possession, it may vary from commodity to commodity, according to its nature and
pursuant to the different customs prevalent in this behalf”. 55
The time when the risk of the item is passed on from the supplier to the bank, and
subsequently from the bank to the customer, must be clearly identified. This is why Shar ¯ı´ah
scholars normally do not approve Murabaha of natural gas in pipes; the gas company cannot
say that from “this” point possession of the gas and its risk has been transferred to the
bank, and then from the bank to the client. Further, the goods must exist at the time of
execution of Murabaha. Sometimes, it happens that the client takes delivery of the goods as
agent and uses them in his process of production even before informing the bank and “offer
55 Council of the Islamic Fiqh Academy, 2000, p. 107.


----- p.229 (pdf 257) -----


Murabaha and Musawamah 229
and acceptance”. This creates a Shar ¯ı´ah objection. Before execution of Murabaha, the bank
must ensure that the item exists in its form and for this purpose it is advisable that the bank
appoints any person for physical inspection. Further, all ownership-related expenses like
Takaful until this point need to be paid by the bank. Any loss before that date also belongs
to the bank, being the principal owner of the goods.
Execution of Murabaha Stage – Offer and Acceptance
After the customer acquires possession of the goods, as an agent, he should give a possession
report and make an offer to purchase the goods acquired by him on the bank’s behalf.
The bank will accept the offer and the transaction will be completed. All the terms of the
Murabaha transaction, such as contract price (cost plus profit), due date or schedule of
payments, etc. must be mentioned in the bank’s letter of acceptance. Upon execution of
Murabaha, the relationship of buyer and seller between the customer and the bank changes
into the relationship of debtor and creditor. After this, the bank will not be liable for any
harm to the goods.
Having taken delivery of the goods as per the purchase requisition, the customer should
confirm that the goods have been examined and are satisfactory in respect of quality and
suitability for his use. He should also relieve the bank from any loss or third party liability
in respect of the goods sold to him. The AAOIFI Standard recommends that the bank should
assign to the customer the right of recourse to the supplier to obtain compensation for any
established defects which would otherwise be recoverable by the bank from the supplier. 56
Security/Collateral against Murabaha Price
The bank can ask the customer to furnish security to its satisfaction for timely payment of
the deferred price. It is also permissible that the sold commodity itself is given to the bank as
a security, provided possession is once given to the customer. In such a case, the customer
would own the risk and reward of the goods. The bank can obtain any of the following
types of security, depending upon the amount of facility, nature of business and credibility
of the customer: a hypothecation charge on assets, a pledge of goods and/or marketable
securities, a lien on deposits, a mortgage charge on movable and immovable properties, bank
guarantees, personal guarantees or any other security mutually agreed between bank and
client. Some Shar ¯ı´ah boards allow taking interest-bearing securities as collateral (Murabaha
facility against TDRs and FDRs); in such a case the bank will have recourse to the extent of
principal only. However, it is preferable not to take interest-bearing instruments as securities
and the customer should be asked to encash the instruments and offer any Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant
securities.
9.9 ISSUES IN MURABAHA
The above complex type of contractual arrangement could create a number of issues relating
to the sale contract, credit price and legal implications of combining promise and agency
with the actual Murabaha contract. One objection sometimes raised in this regard is that
56 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clause 4/9, p. 120.


----- p.230 (pdf 258) -----


230 Understanding Islamic Finance
Murabaha operations by Islamic banks constitute two sales in one; the contract of promise
and the sale deed. The objection is that as the promise is made binding, it takes on the
character of a sale, leading to two contracts in one sale contract. 57 A very simple fact,
however, is that as it does not involve violation of any major Shar ¯ı´ah principle, almost
all contemporary jurists have allowed the combination, as the promise does not take the
form of a formal contract. The implications of a sale contract and a promise to purchase are
different. A unilateral promise remains a promise and cannot take the form of a contract.
With regard to the credit price being more than the cash market price of the goods being
sold under Murabaha, we have already discussed this issue in Chapters 4 and 6. Some other
issues are discussed below.
9.9.1 Avoiding Buy-back
Bai‘ al ‘Inah, commonly known as “buy-back”, is a double sale by which the borrower and
the lender sell and then resell an object between them, once for cash and again for a higher
price on credit, with the net result of a loan with interest. As such, it is a legal device to
circumvent the prohibition of Riba and therefore prohibited. Although banking authorities in
Malaysia consider it acceptable, the mainstream Shar ¯ı´ah experts from the Middle East and
the rest of the world consider it nonpermissible. Therefore, Islamic banks, while conducting
Murabaha to Purchase Orderer, have to be vigilant that the goods being required by the
client are not already owned by him. The AAOIFI also holds this view. 58
9.9.2 Khiyar (Option to Rescind the Sale) in Murabaha
Most scholars do not consider Khiyar (option) to be necessary in modern Murabaha. Some
banks stipulate in the contract that any defect is the liability of the buyer if he examines
the goods himself, or if they are described to him (in such a way) as to eliminate ignorance
(about the goods), which could lead to dispute. However, any lack in the quantity of the
goods or specification remains the liability of the seller. This latter case results in the sale
price being reduced by an amount proportionally corresponding to the missing goods, with
the buyer having the right to rescind the contract. 59
Hence, from a juristic point of view, if the goods are defective or not according to the
stipulated specifications, Khiyar al ‘Aib and Khiyar al Wasf are available to the client, and if
he rejects the goods on the grounds of inferior quality before the execution of the Murabaha
deal, the goods can be returned to the supplier and genuine quality goods can be acquired
through the same or a new Murabaha. The bank can also stipulate that, after inspection of the
goods by the client and execution of Murabaha, it will not be liable for any discrepancies. 60
As discussed above, in the case of warranties, the bank can also assign such rights to the
client.
If option is available to the customer, the bank will be carrying a much larger risk and
may have to carry out, before agreeing to the financing, a more intensive market survey,
that may not be possible for most of the Islamic banks in their present structure and state
57 Ray, 1995, p. 54
58 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, pp. 114, 128.
59 Kuwait Finance House, n.d., 2, Fat ¯awa No. 61, translation in Ray, 1995, p. 181.
60 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Murabaha, clause 4/9.


----- p.231 (pdf 259) -----


Murabaha and Musawamah 231
of infancy. To avoid the risks, what the banks are doing in practice is to make the customer
their agent for the purchase of the goods as well as for taking delivery from the supplier.
The client will be purchasing the goods with full care as per his requirement. Mostly, the
client also identifies the supplier from which the bank should buy the goods. In this case,
the bank can take from him a performance guarantee that he will be responsible in respect
of the quality of the item.
9.9.3 Time of Executing Murabaha
Another issue is the point of time when the bank can legally sell the article to its client. The
requirement in this regard is that a Murabaha contract should be conducted only after the
bank gets ownership and possession and becomes responsible for any loss or any defects
therein.61 Shar¯ı´ah scholars generally recommend that a modern Murabaha operation is
allowed provided the bank takes full possession of the object before selling it, including
bearing the risk of its loss and the responsibility for returning it if it is defective. Murabaha
has to be executed only after the bank has taken possession and the goods exist. However,
there are references in some edicts to sale occurring before the bank has taken possession
of the object. 62 Such edicts might create a credibility problem for Islamic banking. Agency
contracts for buying the goods by the client on behalf of the bank and immediately selling
them to the client are made part and parcel of Murabaha contracts. Islamic banks must avoid
this practice and treat agency contracts as being totally separate and independent from the
Murabaha contracts. After the goods are taken into possession by the client as agent, there
should be a separate offer and acceptance between the client and the bank.
9.9.4 Defaults by the Clients
In the conventional banking system, a delinquent customer has to reschedule his debt, usually
at a higher rate. The additional interest cost to the customer may motivate him to pay
on time. The question, therefore, is how to take care of the problem of deliberate delays
in payments in the Islamic financial system. One option is that a bank stipulates in the
Murabaha agreement that in the case of a customer’s delay in payment without any genuine
reason, all remaining instalments will become due; thus, the customer will try to be more
disciplined.63 The issue of default has also been discussed in Chapters 2 and 7. Below, we
briefly mention the related matters.
By means of an undertaking by the client, Islamic banks stipulate in the contracts that
the client should pay to charity in case of default. Contemporary Shar ¯ı´ah scholars have
evolved a consensus that banks are authorized to impose late fees on delinquent clients (this
means that the clients that are really unable to pay will not be charged any such penalty).
But the proceeds of such penalties are to be used for charitable purposes. Only a court or
any independent body can allocate any part of the penalty as solatium for the banks. The
Shariat Appellate Bench of Pakistan’s Supreme Court says, in this regard:
“The legislature can also confer a power on the court to impose penalty on a party who makes a
default in meeting out his liability or who is found guilty of putting up vexatious pleas and adopting
61 International Association of Islamic Banks, 1990, pp. 36, 37.
62 Kuwait Finance House, n.d., 2, Fatwah No. 63; See also Ray, 1995, p. 48.
63 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Murabaha, clause 5/1.


----- p.232 (pdf 260) -----


232 Understanding Islamic Finance
dilatory tactics with a view to cause delay in decision of the case and in discharging liabilities and
from the amount of such penalty a smaller or bigger part, depending upon the circumstances, can
be awarded as solatium to the party who is put to loss and inconvenience by such tactics. The
amount of penalty can be received by the State and used for charitable purposes and in the projects
of public interest, including the projects intended to ameliorate economic conditions of the sections
of society possessing little or nothing, i.e. needy people/peoples without means”. 64
Therefore, courts or any resolution committees appointed by the State or the regulators
can determine compensation for the actual damage but not for the loss of income calculated
on the basis of the conventional concept of opportunity cost. If any part of the penalty is
not allowed for the bank by a court, the proceeds must be utilized for charitable objectives
only and cannot be made available as compensation to the bank.
Going further ahead on the path of Ijtihad, a Fatwah of the Shar ¯ı´ah board of Al Baraka,
Sudan, authorizes Islamic banks to impose late fees to be taken as the bank’s income on
the basis of a profit rate actually gained by it during the period of default, as if the delayed
money had also earned that profit if received by the bank. 65 However, the idea of charging
a realized rate of return is more akin to the conventional concept of opportunity cost and
it would be very difficult to differentiate Murabaha contracts with such stretched Ijtihad
from Western trade financing involving interest. For the credibility of the Islamic financial
system, such differentiation is necessary.
9.9.5 Rebates on Early Payment
Depending upon the cash flow, some clients may wish to pay earlier than the due date
and demand a prepayment rebate as in the case of conventional banking. However, the
majority of contemporary Shar ¯ı´ah scholars do not allow remission for earlier payment in
Murabaha operations by banks. This issue has been discussed in detail in Chapter 7. The
OIC Fiqh Academy, the Shariat Appellate Bench of the Supreme Court of Pakistan, Shar ¯ı´ah
committees of Islamic banks in the Middle East and Shar ¯ı´ah scholars in general consider that
it would be similar to interest-based instalments sales techniques. The AAOIFI’s Shar ¯ı´ah
Standard on Murabaha, however, allows a rebate if it is not already stipulated in the Murabaha
contract.66 Therefore, if the customer makes early payment and there is no commitment from
the bank in respect of any discount in the price of Murabaha, the bank has discretion in
allowing the rebate or not. But, it should not be made a practice and any such case should
be decided on merit in consultation with the Shar ¯ı´ah advisor.
9.9.6 Rollover in Murabaha
“Rollover” in Murabaha means booking another Murabaha against receivables of any previous
Murabaha, payment in respect of which has not been made by the client. Further mark-up is
added to the receivable in default by a client. This is explicit Riba, as the bank is not entitled
to any amount over and above the debt created in a Murabaha transaction, as a result of which
ownership of the sold goods had already been transferred to the client. Now the bank has no right
of re-pricing. Rescheduling is allowed, but re-pricing and, therefore, rollover is not allowed.
64 Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, pp. 477, para. 24 in the court order; Council of the Islamic Fiqh Academy, 2000, pp. 251, 252;
AAOIFI, 2004–5a, pp. 122, 132.
65 Fatwah translated into English, cf. Ray, 1995, pp. 182, 183.
66 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 132.


----- p.233 (pdf 261) -----


Murabaha and Musawamah 233
The bank, at its discretion, can reschedule the payment without any increase in the original
receivable. Any amount taken from the client on account of late payment, as per his undertaking
in the Murabaha agreement, would go to the charity account. However, there is the possibility
of a fresh Murabaha facility through the sale of new goods.
9.9.7 Murabaha Through Shares
In recent years, some Islamic banks have conducted shares Murabaha, i.e. they purchase
shares through a client as agent and sell them on a Murabaha basis to the clients. As shares
represent tangible assets of joint stock companies, their trading is permissible provided the
screening criteria recommended by the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars are taken into consideration. Their
sale through Murabaha is also permissible, but Islamic banks need to take extra care with
regard to Shar ¯ı´ah compliance matters. Banks should make payment directly to the brokers
and the client should not be appointed agent for purchasing the shares. After the payment
is made by the bank and the shares are transferred to it actually or through any central
depository, the bank can sell them onward on a Murabaha basis. If settlement takes time,
the bank shall wait for actual transfer. Generally, transfer takes three days; so the risk of
price for three days has to be taken by the bank. Further, the shares in respect of which
Murabaha is to be conducted should not be of any sister concern of the client; otherwise it
will be “buy-back” and therefore prohibited.
9.9.8 Commodity Murabaha
Some banks in the Middle East and the West have been using commodity Murabaha on
international commodity exchanges as a treasury operation. This is a very tricky issue and
needs a special role of the Shar ¯ı´ah advisors of the concerned banks. It refers to a short-
term placement mechanism involving purchase and sale of commodities in the international
markets, e.g. London Metal Exchange (LME). Internationally, Islamic banks have relied
mainly on this product for liquidity management.
The banks use Tawarruq and appoint a broker to purchase any metal and then sell the
same on deferred payment to any third broker on the same date. Normally, Islamic banks
make an agent of a conventional bank to buy on their behalf any metal from broker A
against cash payment and then sell that to broker B on deferred payment. Nobody cares
whether any actual transaction has taken place or not, and at which point in time risk was
transferred to the bank. There are doubts about the quantity of metal being sufficient to
cover the transaction volumes. As the brokerage cost makes the product less competitive,
there is a chance that no actual transactions might be taking place. Islamic bankers need
to understand that the Tawarruq arrangement, even in its genuine form, should be used in
extreme cases where no option is available to avoid interest. It has not been approved by all
scholars. Widespread use of such products is harmful to the Islamic banking industry in the
long run.
9.10 PRECAUTIONS IN MURABAHA OPERATIONS
In Murabaha, Islamic banks have to face additional asset risk, greater fiduciary risks, greater
legal risk and the Shar ¯ı´ah compliance risk. To mitigate the legal risk, special care has to be
given to completing documentation for various contracts under the guidance of the bank’s


----- p.234 (pdf 262) -----


234 Understanding Islamic Finance
legal department. Adherence to the AAOIFI’s Shar ¯ı´ah Standards would enable the bank to
get Shar¯ı´ah compliance. In this regard, the role of Shar ¯ı´ah supervisory boards/advisors is of
crucial importance in applying proper internal controls for Shar ¯ı´ah compliance. Mistiming
in documentation may lead to loss of income. Therefore, an Islamic bank must strengthen
its internal Shar ¯ı´ah control and risk management departments. Risk mitigation measures in
Murabaha are given in Box 9.1.
9.11 MUSAWAMAH (BARGAINING ON PRICE)
Musawamah is a general and regular kind of sale in which the price of the commod-
ity to be traded is bargained between the seller and the buyer without any reference to
the price paid or cost incurred by the former. Thus, it is different from Murabaha in
respect of the pricing formula. Unlike Murabaha, the seller in Musawamah is not obliged
to reveal his cost. Both the parties negotiate on the price. All other conditions relevant to
Murabaha are valid for Musawamah as well. Musawamah can be used where the seller
is not in a position to ascertain precisely the costs of commodities that he is offering
to sell.
From a juristic point of view, Musawamah can be either cash or credit sale, but when
used by banks it will generally be a deferred payment sale in which they will bargain with
clients on the price of goods/assets. They will add their profit margin to their cost but will
not be required to tell their clients the details of cost price and their profit in any transaction.
A few Islamic financial institutions have a practice of obtaining a discount from the supplier
in the case of retail goods. In such a case, since actual profit is not brought to the notice of
the customer, it is necessary that such a sale should be conducted through Musawamah and
not Murabaha.
Box 9.1: Risk Management in Murabaha
Nature of Risk Mitigating Tool(s)
Customer refuses to purchase goods
after taking possession as agent.
Promise to purchase the ordered goods is
obtained from customers. Also, Hamish
Jiddiyah may be taken, from which the
bank can cover its actual loss.
Customer did not purchase fresh
assets/goods; has already purchased
and now wants funds for the payment
to the supplier; involves Bai‘ al ‘Inah,
so non-Shar¯ı´ah-compliant.
• Make direct payment to supplier
through DD/PO.
• Obtain invoice of goods purchased. Date
of invoice should not be earlier than the
date of agency agreement and not later
than the declaration or offer to purchase.
• In addition to invoice, obtain any other
evidence, e.g. gate pass, inward register,
entry in stock register, truck receipt.
• Physical inspection of goods.


----- p.235 (pdf 263) -----


Murabaha and Musawamah 235
Goods/asset have been used by
customer before offer and acceptance;
do not exist when Murabaha is
executed, so non-Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant.
Reducing the time interval when offer is to
be made periodically; physical inspection
of goods on a random basis.
In transit, risk of destruction of goods
before offer and acceptance without
agent’s negligence.
During transit, goods are owned by the
bank and all risks belong to the bank. This
risk can be mitigated through obtaining
Takaful cover.
Overdue. Undertaking from the customer is obtained
to give a certain amount to charity in the
case of late payment.
Default risk. Securities/collateral can be realized to
recover loss.
Supplier may not perform his
obligation.
The agent, in his personal capacity, can
guarantee the performance of the supplier.
Purchase from or resale to
associates/subsidiaries.
Obtain related party information from the
financial statements of the company or by
any other source.
Box 9.2: Possible Steps for Murabaha in Import Financing
Step 1: The Islamic bank and the customer will sign a master murabaha agreement (MoU)
and an agency agreement; as per the agency agreement, the customer will purchase goods
from foreign suppliers on the bank’s behalf by opening L/Cs with the bank.
(The difference between a general Murabaha agreement and a sight L/C Murabaha
agreement is that it is possible in sight L/C Murabaha that an item may be sold at cost price
in the case of a spot Murabaha. In order to accommodate such a transaction, the agreement
needs to mention that it can be covered both under Murabaha and Musawamah.)
Step 2: The customer will negotiate a deal with some foreign supplier (exporter) for
the purchase of assets as agent of the bank. It should be ensured that such a deal
should be finalized only after execution of the agency agreement.
(Otherwise, it could be a problem for the bank in the case of sight L/C; if the
customer delays in making payment, the bank will have to suffer the loss, as it would
not be able to earn any profit on the amount paid to the exporter through the negotiating
bank.)
Step 3: The importer will request the bank to open an L/C by submitting all relevant
documents. Takaful should be arranged by the importer on behalf of the bank (cost to
be borne by the bank) and the relevant policy should be forwarded along with the L/C
application form. The bank will issue an L/C in the favour of the beneficiary (exporter).


----- p.236 (pdf 264) -----


236 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 9.2: (Continued)
Step 4: On receipt of the L/C, the exporter will ship the goods and deliver the related
shipping documents to the negotiating bank for the payment of the bill amount. If the
documents are found to be in order, the negotiating bank will send the documents to the
Islamic bank.
Step 5: On receipt of the documents, the Islamic bank will contact the customer
and inform him of the availability of the documents. The customer will negotiate the
FX rate for the required foreign currency amount. The Islamic bank will discuss the
payment terms with the customer and settle the bill.
Settlement: Sight L/C
If the customer is not in need of credit and wishes to settle the transaction, the bank
will issue a Musawamah declaration to the customer. Through spot Murabaha or
Musawamah, the bank will sell the assets at the following spot price to the customer:
L/C cost + all charges + Takaful charges. After receiving payment, the bank will
release the shipping documents to the customer. However, the bank’s risk on the goods
will end only after delivery of the assets to the customer.
Settlement: Customer Requires Financing
The Islamic bank will discuss the payment date with the customer and execute the
Murabaha, which means the signing of a declaration by the customer and the acceptance
of its offer to purchase by the Islamic bank. Profit will be charged from the day the
bank’s Nostro was debited to the Murabaha settlement date according to the agreed
profit rate. The bank will release the shipping documents to the customer and record
a Murabaha receivable.
(MPO is being using widely for local and foreign trade financing by Islamic banks. Such Murabahas include: (i) local currency:
simple Murabaha, advance payment Murabaha, suppliers’ credit murabaha; (ii) foreign currency: sight L/C spot Murabaha, sight
L/C deferred Murabaha, usance L/C Murabaha.)
Box 9.3: Accounting Treatment by Islamic Banks in Murabaha
Measurement of asset value at acquisition: asset is measured and recorded at
historical cost.
After acquisition: (1) asset available for sale on Murabaha to the purchase orderer
who is obliged to fulfil his promise shall be measured at historical cost and any decline
in value shall be reflected in the valuation of the asset at the end of the financial
period. (2) If there is an indication of nonrecovery of costs of goods, the asset shall
be measured at cash equivalent value (net realizable value). This value is obtained by
creating a provision for decline in the asset value to reflect the difference between
acquisition cost and the cash equivalent value.
Potential discount after acquisition: (1) the discount shall not be considered as
revenue, however it should reduce the cost of goods. (2) The discount may be treated
as revenue if this is decided by the Islamic bank’s Shar ¯ı´ah supervisory board.
Murabaha receivables: These shall be recorded at the time of occurrence at their
cash equivalent value.


----- p.237 (pdf 265) -----


Murabaha and Musawamah 237
Profit recognition: profit shall be recognized at the time of contracting if the sale
is for cash or on credit but the term does not exceed the current financial period.
Profits of credit sale whose payment is due after the current financial period shall be
recognized using any of the following methods:
• Proportionate allocation of profits method; may be adopted whether or not cash is
received, which is the preferred method.
• Profit may also be recognized as and when received. Disclose the accrued amount
of profit if the accrual method has not been followed.
• Deferred profits shall be offset against Murabaha receivables in the statement of
financial position.
Early settlement with deduction of part of profit (deduction of profit at the time
of settlement): the bank may deduct the part of the profit agreed upon from the
payment of one or more instalments.
Deduction of part of profit after settlement: the above criteria should be applied for
payments of one or more instalments before the time specified, the Islamic bank may ask
the client to pay the full amount and thereafter reimburse with part of the profit.
Failure to fulfil promise having paid Hamish Jiddiyah: Hamish Jiddiyah shall be
treated as a liability on an Islamic bank.
Treatment for nonbinding promise: Hamish Jiddiyah shall be returned in full even
if the asset is sold at a lower amount to another client.
Treatment for binding promise: the amount of actual loss shall be deducted from
Hamish Jiddiyah. In the absence of any guarantee or Hamish Jiddiyah, any loss incurred
shall be recorded as a receivable due from the defaulter client.
Procrastination: the amount received as a penalty shall be treated as revenue or an
allocation to the charity fund, as any arbitration or Shar ¯ı´ah board deems appropriate.
Insolvency: the Islamic bank cannot ask the client to pay any additional amount by
way of penalty.
Box 9.4: Murabaha Financing for Exports: Process and Steps
1. Exporter and bank sign an agreement to enter into Murabaha.
2. Exporter is appointed as agent to purchase goods on the bank’s behalf.
3. Bank gives money to supplier/vendor for purchase of the goods.
4. Exporter purchases goods on the bank’s behalf and takes their possession.
5. Exporter makes an offer to purchase the goods from the bank.
6. Bank accepts the offer and sale is concluded.
7. Exporter pays the agreed price to the bank according to an agreed schedule.


----- p.238 (pdf 266) -----


238 Understanding Islamic Finance
9.11.1 Musawamah as a Mode of Financing
Businesses normally use Musawamah, in that they are interested only in profit, which they
earn through pricing, while Islamic banks mostly use Murabaha. This is because direct use
of any benchmark is relatively easier in Murabaha than in the case of Musawamah. It is
easier for the bank management and the regulators to manage the return rate structure in
Murabaha. Further, chances of corruption are minimal in Murabaha, because whatever the
level of price of the asset, the bank will be charging a profit margin tied up with the cost
price of the asset.
Musawamah is more suitable for single huge transactions, wherein decisions are made
normally at the top level and the price is bargained between the parties. For example, an
airline in the Middle East may require credit purchase of an aeroplane costing about $500
million. An Islamic bank may purchase the aeroplane for $450 million, for example, and
sell it to the airline after adding its profit of $50 million, keeping in mind the credit period
and the payment schedule. Details of the cost price to the bank will not be needed and the
airline will be interested in the final price only. Similarly, Musawamah could be used in
financing of all such purchases where it is not possible for banks to tell a number of minute
details, as required in Murabaha.
The agency structure can also be used in Musawamah, but it is better and preferable
that the bank directly purchases the assets, particularly expensive assets. However, the bank
may involve the clients in selection of the supplier and the assets to ensure that the assets
being purchased by the bank have all the specifications requested by the client. In the case
of assets with a huge price, the structure used by banks will be Musawamah to Purchase
Orderer, while in the case of less expensive goods, generally demanded by businesses and
the public, banks or their specially created subsidiaries can maintain inventory for sale to
the clients on a Musawamah basis as and when demanded by the clients.
The conditions of taking ownership, possession and business risk of the asset are equally
applicable in Musawamah as in the case of Murabaha. Goods required for onward sale must
come under the risk of the bank before execution of the sale contract with the customer.
Similarly, all conditions regarding subject matter, payment of the stipulated price and the
treatment in case of default, etc. will be the same as in the case of Murabaha. The only
difference is that the bank is not required to disclose details about its cost price or profit
margin, and bargaining will be on the final price of the goods.
9.12 SUMMARY
Musharakah or Mudarabah (PLS modes) may not necessarily be suitable for all the financial
needs of modern businesses. In many cases, such modes may neither be feasible nor desired
by the banks or their clients. The majority of the traditional as well as the contemporary jurists
have, therefore, allowed a number of other modes which facilitate the sale (or purchase) of
goods and usufruct of such goods, the corpus of which is not consumed with their use. One
such trade-based mode is Murabaha, which takes the form of Murabaha–Mu’ajjal (cost-plus
sale with deferred payment of price) when used by banks.
Murabaha refers to a mutually stipulated margin of profit in a sale transaction, where the
cost of the commodity is known or made known to the buyer. The parties negotiate the
profit margin on cost and not the cost per se. If payment of the sale price is deferred, it also
becomes Mu’ajjal. The due date of payment of the price must be fixed in an unambiguous


----- p.239 (pdf 267) -----


Murabaha and Musawamah 239
manner. Other terms used for similar transactions are instalments sale, cost-plus/mark-up
based sale, etc.
According to contemporary Shar ¯ı´ah scholars, Murabaha–Mu’ajjal is legitimate provided
the risk of the transaction is borne by the financier until the possession has been passed
on to the Murabaha customer. For such a transaction to be legal, the bank must purchase a
commodity through a contract and sell it to the customer under a separate contract.
Notwithstanding the fact that dangers are associated with the use of Murabaha by banks
as an Islamic mode of financing, the reality is that Islamic banks all over the world are
resorting heavily to this mode for one reason or another. An important consideration in this
regard is that banks hold depositors’ money as trustees. Investment of money should be
undertaken keeping in mind the depositors’ aspirations/advice and their risk profiles. If any
classes of society, like the old and widows or others depending on their savings for their
sustenance, do not want to take the risk of loss possible in PLS modes, their money has to
be invested in less risky avenues on the basis of trade- or leasing based modes. Faced with
this dilemma, the available way out is that it has to be used with utmost caution, with such
a structure that fulfilment of the Shar ¯ı´ah essentials is ensured.
Credit sale is allowed by the clear texts of the Shar ¯ı´ah. Instalments sale with a price
higher than the cash market price is also permitted as a normal reflection of market based
commercial activities. A deferred Murabaha price, higher than the cash-n-carry price, is
objected to by some of the theoreticians working on Islamic banking and finance. But this
aspect needs to be seen on the two separate fronts of permissibility and preference of one
mode over the other. There is no doubt about the permissibility of Murabaha with a credit
price higher than the cash market price of the related commodity. PLS modes are preferable,
but in order to safeguard the interests of the depositors, these modes need to be used keeping
in mind the risk profiles of various businesses and the parties involved.
Murabaha, as currently being used in Islamic banking, is something different from the
Murabaha discussed in Fiqh literature. This transaction is concluded with a prior promise to
buy or a request made by a person interested in acquiring goods on credit from any financial
institution. Further, the customer is normally appointed an agent of the bank for the purchase
of the item on behalf of the bank. As such, it is called “Murabaha to Purchase Orderer”
(MPO), which normally comprises three separate deals including a promise to buy or to
sell, an agency contract and the actual Murabaha contract. Islamic banks also enter into an
MoU or Murabaha facility agreement which contains the overall structure of the transaction,
the profit rate to be charged in various sub-Murabahas, the nature of collateral/security,
treatment in the case of default or other developments.
Banks must make sure that the client intends to purchase a commodity capable of being
the subject of Murabaha. Payment of the price may be made directly to the supplier and, if
it becomes necessary due to the nature of the item that funds be given to the client, purchase
of the commodity should be evidenced by invoices or similar other documents which the
client should present to the bank.
Buy-back arrangements and rollover in Murabaha are not allowed. Therefore, the banks
must ensure that the goods requested by the client are not already in his ownership.
In order to ensure that the buyer pays the instalments promptly, he may be asked to
promise that in the case of a default he will pay a certain amount of penalty for any charitable
purpose. Such a penalty shall not constitute bank income and shall be utilized for charitable
purposes only.


----- p.240 (pdf 268) -----




