
----- p.241 (pdf 269) -----


10
Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘ a
10.1 INTRODUCTION
As discussed in Chapters 5 and 6, there are three basic conditions for the validity of a
sale. These are: the commodity to be sold must exist; the seller should have acquired the
ownership of that commodity and as such its possible risks; and the commodity must be in
the physical or constructive possession of the seller. These conditions are imposed to avoid
the possibility of Gharar and dispute regarding the subject matter. However, there are two
exceptions: Salam and Istisna‘a. Exception is accorded on the ground that some conditions
have been advised, fulfilment of which renders them free from Gharar. As in both of these
sales delivery of the subject matter is deferred to the future, these can be termed forward
sales. In the Islamic framework, commodity markets can exist for the future delivery of
goods subject to the rules relating to Salam and Istisna‘a. The modern futures markets that
deal in futures like options, derivatives, swaps, etc. do not qualify under these rules.
10.2 BAI‘ SALAM/SALAF
Bai‘ Salam is an ancient form of forward contract wherein the price was paid in advance at
the time of making the contract for prescribed goods to be delivered later. The two terms
“Salam” and “Salaf” have been used interchangeably in Hadith literature to describe the
contract for future delivery of specified goods with up-front payment of the price. The parties
stipulate a certain time for supply of goods of specified quantity and quality. This is contrary
to Bai‘ Mu’ajjal, in which goods are delivered to the purchaser in advance and the agreed
price is paid at a stipulated date in the future. The word Salaf or Taslif, which literally
means payment in advance, referring to a sale by advance payment, was used by jurists of
Hijaz, while the jurists based in Baghdad, Iraq mainly used the term Salam for forward sale
transactions. As the commodity to be delivered in future against prompt payment becomes
a debt on the part of the seller, the transaction is termed Salaf and implies a loan without
any benefit. 1 As, in the emerging Islamic finance movement, Salam is normally used to
denote a forward transaction of a defined nature, we have used the word “Salam” throughout
the book.
Salam has been permitted by the holy Prophet (pbuh) himself, without any difference of
opinion among the early or the contemporary jurists, notwithstanding the general principle
of the Shar ¯ı´ah that the sale of a commodity which is not in the possession of the seller
is not permitted. Upon migration from Makkah, the Prophet came to Madinah, where the
people used to pay in advance the price of fruit (or dates) to be delivered within one, two
1 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, pp. 163, 172; Standard on Salam, clause 2/2. Also see Ibn Hajar, 1998, pp. 85, 86.


----- p.242 (pdf 270) -----


242 Understanding Islamic Finance
and three years. But such a sale was carried out without specifying the quality, measure
or weight of the commodity or the time of delivery. The holy Prophet ordained: “Whoever
pays money in advance (for fruit) (to be delivered later) should pay it for a known quality,
specified measure and weight (of dates or fruit) of course along with the price and time of
delivery”.2
The rationale for this permission, as described by S.M. Hasanuz Zaman, is the concept of
“necessity”. He adds:
“It is stated that the practice, as qualified by the Prophet (pbuh), continued during his life and
subsequently. The later jurists unanimously treated it as a permissible mode of business. The list
of items covered by Bai‘ Salam suggests that it benefited the owners of farms and orchards. For
example, the Madinan list of cultivation covered wheat, barley, dates and grapes. The conquest of
Syria added to it such items as olives and dried large grapes. /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiBarring a few exceptions, the
jurists have expanded the list of items, in regard to which Salam is permissible, to cover all the
commodities that could be precisely determined in terms of quality and quantity.” 3
10.3 BENEFITS OF SALAM AND THE ECONOMIC ROLE OF
BAI‘ SALAM
Forward sale in the form of Salam has been allowed by the Shar ¯ı´ah with such a structure
that it becomes free from Riba, Gharar and, therefore, from exploitation of one party by the
other. It is rather based on genuine need of the business and, therefore, beneficial to both
buyer and seller. The seller gets in advance the money he needs in exchange of obligation
to deliver the commodity later. Thus, he benefits from the Salam sale by covering his
cash/liquidity needs in respect of personal expenses or for productive or trading activity.
The purchaser gets the commodity he has planned to trade at the time he decides. He will
also benefit from cheap prices, because usually the Salam price is cheaper than the cash
market price. This way he will also be secured against fluctuations of price.
S.M. Hasanuz Zaman has given a detailed account of this aspect of Bai‘ Salam. 4 The
Hadith legalizing the practice suggests that it was meant to meet the financial requirement
of farmers who needed funds for a period ranging from one to three years. The economic
role which Bai‘ Salam is supposed to perform can be summarized as follows:
• The period of delivery ranging from one year to three years suggests that the amount
of advance was not small; otherwise this should have been adjusted earlier than the
harvesting of crop or fraction of the garden.
• In view of the period involved in the deal, it can be claimed with confidence that the
buyers were not consumers of the product; they were traders or prospective traders.
• The popularity of this practice leads us to believe that the price received in advance might
have met both the productive and consumption requirements of the cultivators.
• Fixation of three years as the time of delivery suggests that money was also required for
fixed investment like improvement of land and growing gardens. In the context of Syria,
2 The Hadith reported by Imam Bukhari, Muslim and others. See AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 171. For the legal status and permission of
Salam as a special case, see Zuhayli, 2003, 1, p. 256.
3 Hasanuz Zaman, 1991, pp. 443, 444.
4 Hasanuz Zaman, 1991, pp. 448–450.


----- p.243 (pdf 271) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 243
digging of wells and providing irrigation facilities could also be a possible purpose of the
request for advance payment.
From the point of view of the farmers, Bai‘ Salam might be a preferable way of taking
financing as compared to a loan with interest, because first, it did not make an increase
in cost as interest did and, second, it saved them from the hardships and the risk involved
in marketing their produce. It is not certain whether the institutions of Bai‘ Salam brought
about any change in the role of intermediaries in the rural economy. It is, however, certain
that it paved the way for a direct relationship between the grower and the trader in the city,
who generally was the supplier of funds.
As the buyer in a free market would always choose to purchase at a price which gives
him good income on resale on the stipulated date and during the supply season, Bai‘ Salam
could prove an effective means of stabilizing the price at a moderate level during periods
of seasonal fall in demand. And because the Shar ¯ı´ah does not allow resale of Salam
goods before they are actually transferred to the buyer, this would protect the prices from
exposure to speculative rise and stabilize them at a lower level. Contrary to this, financing
production/inventory building through loans with interest automatically increases the cost of
production/stocks. This increase is further shot up by speculative transactions for anticipated
brisk trade seasons.
Salam provides a price hedge for the buyer and protects both the buyer and the seller
from the respective risks of revenue and price-indexed debts. There is less incentive on the
part of the seller to transfer any additional risks to the buyer by manipulating his reported
revenues, as could happen in the conventional commodity forward market. Part of the
variation in revenue has been already transferred to (and accepted by) the buyer in the form
of a predetermined price, and the other (quantity) part is contractually fixed.
As a forward contract, it gives the buyer the required hedge against possible future
price increases. It gives the seller the required price protection and does not involve any
predetermined cash debt on either party. One can get financing directly from buyers without
involving any intermediary. However, banks can participate as a buyer on a Salam basis in
a competitive environment. Hence, a Salam contract can bring about the benefits of a swap 5
without the involvement of interest and at a lower cost. The transaction costs associated
with a Salam contract are likely to be much lower than those of a swap.
10.4 FEATURES OF A VALID SALAM CONTRACT
A valid Salam contract requires the following conditions 6 (it goes without saying that it
should also fulfil the conditions of a normal valid sale).
5 A swap is an agreement whereby one party replaces one cash flow (or commitment) by another that is indexed to some price
or interest rate. A country that obtains a loan, for instance, exchanges its debt obligation with another firm that undertakes to
assume the obligation in exchange for payments based on the price of some commodity. In spite of the expected benefits of swap
agreements, they may not be among the best instruments, for the overall transaction costs associated with them may be very high.
For detail, see Uthman, 2003.
6 In the Fiqh literature there are lengthy details regarding subject matter, price, delivery of the commodity, substitution of the
subject matter and other aspects of Salam sale. We are skipping those details for the purpose of brevity. Those interested, may like
to see Financial Transactions in Islamic Jurisprudence by Wahbah Zuhayli (Zuhayli, 2003, 1, 237–265).


----- p.244 (pdf 272) -----


244 Understanding Islamic Finance
10.4.1 Subject Matter of Salam
On which items Salam can be conducted is the first important aspect. There is a consensus
that everything that can be precisely determined in terms of quality and quantity can be
made the subject of Salam sale. There is also unanimity on the point that the commodity
should be well-defined but not particularized to a specific unit of farm, tree or garden.
Only those fungible (Mithli) things various units of which do not differ from each other in
a significant manner can be contracted under Salam. Salam cannot take place where both
items of exchange are identical, e.g. wheat for wheat and potato for potato. Similarly, the
commodity to be sold through Salam should, in itself, not be of the nature of money, like
gold, silver or any currency.
Differences existed among the traditional jurists regarding the list of commodities that
can be sold under Bai‘ Salam. The advocates of Bai‘ Salam in animals and their flesh argue
that the quality of these items can be defined in terms of their species, kind and quality.
Similarly, controversy existed in respect of items like cane, grass, fodder, bread, honey,
milk, vegetables, oils, cheese, birds, fish, trained dogs, leopards, precious stones, heaps of
charcoal wood, musk, aloe, perfumes, hide and skin, wool, hair, animal fats, paper, cloth,
carpets, rugs, mine dust construction bricks, bowls, bottles, shoes and drugs. The cause of
controversy is understandable, because standardization of most of these items was a very
difficult job in the days when the jurists compiled their Fiqh (fourth–sixth century Hijrah).
They were generally inclined to approve only the sale of those items where various units
did not differ, so as to remove any possibility of Gharar and dispute at the time of delivery.
The contemporary scholars have come to the conclusion that all goods that can be stan-
dardized into identical units can become the subject of Salam. For example, wheat, rice,
barley, oil, iron and copper or other grains of this type, products of companies which are
regularly and commonly available at any time, like carpets, tin packs of various consumption
items, etc., can be sold through Salam. 7 The commodity should be generally available in
the market. Jurists of all schools of thought agree that the contracted commodity in Salam
should be such that it is normally available in the market at least at the agreed time of
delivery.8 Thus, it should not be nonexistent or a rare commodity out of supply, or out of
season, making it inaccessible to the seller at the time when it has to be delivered.
The buyer must unambiguously define the quality and quantity of the goods and the
definition must be applicable to the generally available items of the subject matter. The
specifications of goods should particularly cover all such characteristics that could cause
variation in price. The jurists have devoted a large portion of discussion on the subject
of the specifications and qualities of the subject of Salam which cause variation in value
of the same item. The aim is to plug any possible causes of dispute as to the basic spirit of
the Islamic law of sale. It is because of the spirit of ensuring mutual consent that the jurists
have tried to remove all the possible causes of dissent throughout the deal.
Salam is not allowed for anything identified like “this car” or things for which the seller
may not be held responsible, like land, buildings, trees or products of “this field”, because
that particular field may not ultimately give any produce. Similarly, Salam is not possible for
items whose value depends upon subjective assessment, like landscapes, precious gems and
7 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Salam, clause 3/2/2, p. 164.
8 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Salam, clause 3/2/8, pp. 165, 173.


----- p.245 (pdf 273) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 245
antiques.9 Hence, the Salam commodity of defined specifications is made the responsibility
of the seller, so that he can supply them by taking them from the market. As reported
by Imam Bukhari in his Sahih, Abdur Rahman bin Abza and Abdullah bin Abi Aufa,
Companions of the holy Prophet (pbuh), upon asking about Salam goods said, “ /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiwhen
the peasants of Syria came to us, we used to pay them in advance for wheat, barley and
oil to be delivered within a fixed period”. They were again asked, “Did the peasants own
standing crops or not?” They replied, “We never asked them about it”. Therefore, it is not
necessary that the Salam seller himself produces the goods to be delivered in the future;
rather, such specification has to be avoided to enable the seller to make available the item
from where he can arrange.
Salam in Currencies
The majority of jurists do not allow Salam in gold, silver, currencies or monetary units,
although a few jurists have allowed it and, as such, a few Islamic banks have been using
Salam in currencies as an alternative to bill discounting. As this issue is of far-reaching
implications, it needs to be discussed in detail.
As discussed in various foregoing chapters of the book, money is treated differently from
other commodities. Gold, silver and other metallic money like Fulus 10 of copper or other
metals can be used for some purposes other than for making payments; hence, they can be
traded keeping in mind the Shar ¯ı´ah principles. However, paper money can be used only in
payment of a price, it cannot serve as a commodity to be sold. The currency notes in vogue
are monetary values. They have no value in the absence of government commitment and are
wanted only for the purpose of exchange and payments and not for themselves. Accordingly,
the present fiduciary money in the form of currency notes is cash money or monetary value
and unlimited legal tender for making payment, as creditors are obliged to accept it for the
recovery of debts.
The counter values to be exchanged in Salam include prompt price payment on the one
hand and deferred delivery of the commodity on the other. However, if the price in Salam
is US Dollars, for example, and the commodity to be purchased/sold is Pak Rupees, it will
be a currency transaction which cannot be made through Salam, because such exchange of
currencies requires the simultaneous payment on both sides, while in Salam, delivery of the
commodity is deferred.
In exchange/trade transactions, the commodity to be sold (Mabi‘) and the price (Thaman)
should be differentiated. A commodity is the principal object of sale from which the benefit
is ultimately to be derived, in lieu of a price as settled between the contracting parties. The
Thaman, on the other hand, is only a medium of exchange. Currency notes represent Thaman
and money. A lawful sale, therefore, is the sale of commodities for money or for any other
consideration measurable in terms of money possessing utility, but money sold for money is
generally not a lawful contract and is qualified with a number of conditions. 11 Money, being
a medium of exchange and a measure of value, cannot be taken as a “production good”
which yields profit on a daily basis, as is presumed by the theories of interest.
9 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Salam, clause 3/2/3, p. 164.
10 Fulus were copper or other inferior metal coins. Every district/area had its own Fulus of different genus, quality and quantity.
For example, one district had 100 coins of one kilogram of copper, while another had 50 coins of the same amount of copper. They
were commodities having intrinsic value. (Lewis et al. , 1965, 2, p. 49.)
11 See Shariat Appellate Bench, 2000, Taqi Usmani’s part, para. 152.


----- p.246 (pdf 274) -----


246 Understanding Islamic Finance
Justice Khalil-ur-Rehman, in his part of the Judgement of the Supreme Court of Pakistan
on Riba says about Fulus:
“ /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmitheir position was not that of an independent currency. They were a form of sub-money used
only to make payments of the fractions of a silver coin because it was not easy to break one silver
dirham into two equal parts for making payment of half, nor was it easy for the government or the
money changers to issue smaller silver coins to facilitate such fractional payments. Therefore, the
principles developed by the jurists to regulate the exchange of copper Fulus will not be applicable
to the paper currency and fiat money of today. Today’s paper money has practically become almost
like natural money, equal in terms of its facility of exchange and credibility to the old silver and
golden coins. It will, therefore, be subject to all those injunctions laid down in the Qur’ ¯an and the
Sunnah, which regulated the exchange or transactions of gold and silver”. 12
A study conducted by the IRTI of the IDB (Umar, 1995) on Salam has thoroughly
discussed the issue of whether money can be used as a commodity in Salam. It says:
“The second form: when the principal is money (Saudi Riyals) and the commodity sold is another
type of money (US Dollars); this is a currency exchange transaction that cannot be made through
Salam, which requires deferred delivery of the commodity sold while such exchange requires
simultaneous payment of the two exchanged amounts. Allama Shirbini gives the following opinion
in the case where the principal (price) is money and the commodity sold is also money: ‘It is not
permissible to pay one of them as Salam principal for the other because Salam requires payment
of only one of the two exchanged objects of the contract at the time of signing the contract, while
the currency exchange requires simultaneous payment of both the exchanged amounts’.” 13
According to all schools of thought of Islamic jurisprudence, and particularly to the Hanafi
and Maliki Fuqaha, the principal paid in Salam should be in the form of money and the two
transacted items should not be of the kind whose exchange would lead to Riba. 14 According
to the jurists, it is a condition of Salam that the price and the commodity sold should be of
the kind that can permissibly be dealt in on a deferment basis. Allama Ibn-e-Rushd explained
this issue in a comparative manner when he said about this condition: “If they are not of
that kind, Salam cannot be practised in them.” 15
In view of the above, it is concluded that forward sale or purchase of currencies to take the
form of Salam is not a valid contract. Fulus that were a form of metallic money could be used
for trading on the basis of their metal content. But currency notes are Thaman, wanted only
for exchange and payments and not for themselves. Allowing the exchange of heterogeneous
currencies through Salam would open a floodgate of explicit Riba. The objects of Salam
sale are commodities of trade and not currencies, because these are regarded as monetary
values, exchange of which is covered under the rules of Bai‘ al Sarf.
10.4.2 Payment of Price: Salam Capital
Price is normally stipulated and paid in the form of any legal tender. However, it can be in
terms of goods as well, on the condition that it should not violate the prohibition of Riba in
barter transactions as laid down by the Shar ¯ı´ah. Usufruct of assets can also be considered
as Salam capital, which is regarded, particularly by Maliki jurists, as immediate receipt of
12 Shariat Appellate Bench, February, 2000, pp. 269–273.
13 Umar, 1995, p. 39, with reference from Shirbini, 1958, p. 114.
14 Umar, 1995, pp. 42, 43.
15 Umar, 1995, p. 43.


----- p.247 (pdf 275) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 247
the capital on the basis of the legal maxim that says: “Taking possession of a part of a thing
is like taking possession of the whole thing”. Hence, making usufruct capital of Salam does
not mean debt against debt, which is prohibited. 16
Outstanding loans/debts due on the part of the seller cannot be fully or partially fixed
as price, nor can a loan outstanding on a third party be transferred to the seller in future
adjustment towards the price, as this amounts to an exchange of obligation for obligation
(debt for debt), which is forbidden. This is also to avoid Gharar. This emphasis by the jurists
is justified since the equity in Salam contracts depends on the very existence of the Salam
capital, otherwise such transactions are invalid. The very term Salaf (Salam) means advance
payment; if payment is delayed, it cannot be called Salam. 17
The buyer in Salam should advance the whole price of the commodity at the time of
making the contract. However, while the jurists are agreed on immediate payment of the
price, they differ on defining the term “immediate”. According to the majority of the jurists,
the buyer must pay the amount at the time of signing the contract, in that very meeting. Imam
Shafi‘e emphasizes that the time must be fixed and payment of the price must take place
on the spot and before separation of the parties. But some jurists allow delayed payment
provided this delay is not prolonged to make it like a debt. Imam Malik allows a delay of up
to three days. 18 Contemporary jurists also allow a delay of two to three days, if it has been
stipulated between the parties, provided it is before the delivery period of the commodity
involved (in the case of Salam for a short period of a few days). 19
As regards barter transactions in Bai‘ Salam, any number or quantity of goods, as the
case may be, cannot be advanced for deferred delivery of the same species of goods. As an
example, a bank cannot advance ten tons of an improved variety of wheat seed for sowing
against twenty-five tons of wheat at harvest. It may advance, for example, a tractor as the
price for an agreed amount and quality of cotton or rice. Practically, however, the bank
would avoid this and all purchases would be made against money.
Mode of Payment
Cash payment is not necessary in Salam; the price can be credited to the seller’s account.
Crediting the agreed amount in the seller’s account can be termed, in letter, a debt for a
debt, but in spirit, it does not fall under the prohibited form of a debt for a debt. Hence, it
will not be necessary for banks to pay hard cash for Bai‘ Salam; they may credit the seller’s
account or issue a pay order in favour of the seller, which may be cashable on demand. In
all such cases, money may remain in the bank but is placed at the disposal of the seller.
10.4.3 Period and Place of Delivery
In Salam it is necessary to precisely fix the period/time of delivery of goods. Place of
delivery also has to be agreed. As regards the time or the period of delivery in Salam, the
early compilations of the Hadith mention the practice of fixing a period of one to three years
for delivery of farm products. The later jurists, who expanded the application of Salam,
16 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 172.
17 See AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 164, clause 3/1/4; also p. 172 for the rationale of prepayment; references have been given from a
number of books of Hadith/Fiqh.
18 Zuhayli, 2003, p. 261.
19 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 164.


----- p.248 (pdf 276) -----


248 Understanding Islamic Finance
reduced the period to fifteen days, some even to one day, which, as they argued, was the
minimum period necessary for the transport of a commodity from one market to another.
Some jurists believed in precise fixation of the date on which delivery was to be made,
while some others approved of a rough date but a definite period or occasion of delivery;
for example, on harvest. 20
Contemporary scholars recommend that the due date and place of delivery must be known.
The period could be anything from a few days to a number of years, depending upon the
nature of the commodity involved. Delivery can also be made in different consignments or
instalments if mutually agreed. 21 Before delivery, goods will remain at the risk of the seller.
Delivery of goods can be physical or constructive. After delivery, risk will be transferred to
the purchaser. Transferring of risk and authority of use and utilization/consumption are the
basic ingredients of constructive possession.
If a place of delivery is not stipulated at the time of the Salam agreement, the place
at which the contract was executed will be regarded as the place where the goods will
be delivered. The parties can also mutually decide about the place, keeping in mind the
customary practice. 22
10.4.4 Khiyar (Option) in Salam
The jurists disallow the operation of the Islamic law of option (Khiyar alShart) in the case
of Bai‘ Salam because this disturbs or delays the seller’s right of ownership over the price
of the goods. The purchaser also does not have the “option of seeing” (Khiyar al Ro’yat),
which is available in the case of normal sales. However, after taking delivery, the purchaser
has the “option of defect” (Khiyar al‘Aib) and the option of specified quality. This means
that if the commodity is defective or it does not have the quality or specification as agreed
at the time of contract, the purchaser can rescind the sale. But in that case, only the paid
amount of price can be recovered without any increase.
10.4.5 Amending or Revoking the Salam Contract
In Salam, a seller is bound to deliver the goods as stipulated in the agreement. Similarly,
the buyer has no right to unilaterally change the conditions of the contract in respect of the
quality or quantity or the period of delivery of the contracted goods after payment is made to
the seller. Both parties, however, have the right to rescind the contract with mutual consent
in full or in part. The buyer will thus have a right to get back the amount advanced by him;
but not more or less than it. 23
The seller may often be willing to rescind the contract if the market price of the contracted
goods is higher at the time of delivery than what the bank has paid to him. Similarly, the
bank may be inclined to withdraw from the purchase if the price of the contracted item goes
down at the time of delivery. It is, therefore, advisable, to make Bai‘ Salam between a bank
and a supplier an irrevocable contract. The only exception may be the complete absence
of the goods in the market or their becoming inaccessible to the seller just at the time of
20 Hasanuz Zaman, 1991, p. 447.
21 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clause 3/2/9, p. 165.
22 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clause 3/2/10, p. 165.
23 See, Hasanuz Zaman, 1991, p. 453 and AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clauses 4/2, 4/3, 5/5, pp. 165, 166, 173.


----- p.249 (pdf 277) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 249
delivery. Only in this situation may the seller be allowed to rescind the contract, provided
the bank refuses to extend the period of delivery until the next supply season. In the case of
revocation of the contract, the bank will charge exactly the same amount that it had paid.
If the seller supplies the goods before the stipulated time, generally the jurists do not
bind the buyer to take possession of it. Those who relax the rule subject it to the interest
of the buyer. The buyer can refuse to accept the goods only if they are not according to the
stipulated specifications. Any change in prices would allow neither the seller nor the buyer
to rescind the contract or to refuse to give or take delivery. Hence, according to the majority
of jurists, Salam is considered a nonrevocable sale except with free mutual consent.
Jurists allow the purchaser to take any goods in place of the agreed goods, after the due
date falls, provided both parties agree and the new item is of a different genus from the
original commodity and the market value of the substitute is not more than the value of the
original commodity at the delivery date. Further, it should not be stipulated in the Salam
contract.24
10.4.6 Penalty for Nonperformance
The seller can undertake in the Salam agreement that in the case of late delivery of Salam
goods, he shall pay into the Charity Account maintained by the bank an amount which will
be given to charity on behalf of the client. This undertaking is, in fact, a sort of self-imposed
penalty to keep oneself away from default. Clause 5/7 of the AAOIFI’s Salam Standard
says: “It is not permitted to stipulate a penalty clause in respect of delay in the delivery of
the Muslam Fihi (Salam commodity).” This implies that any such penalty cannot become
part of the bank’s (seller’s) income. A penalty can be agreed in the contract in order to avoid
wilful default, as discussed in Chapters 4 and 7. If the seller fails to fulfil his obligation due
to insolvency, he should be granted an extension of time for delivery. 25
10.5 SECURITY, PLEDGE AND LIABILITY OF THE SURETIES
It is permissible to ask for security or a pledge in a Salam transaction as proved from the
Sunnah of the holy Prophet (pbuh). Imam Bukhari has captioned two chapters “Kafeel fis
Salam” and “Al-Rihn fis Salam” and reported the Hadith of the holy Prophet borrowing
grain from a Jew against the pledge of an iron breastplate. This Hadith has no mention of
Kafeel. Ibn Hajar in Fathul Bari has explained this by saying that Imam Bukhari intended
to describe the permissibility of Kafeel in Salam by copermitting Rihn and Kafeel. 26
The seller can be required to furnish any security, personal surety or a pledge. In the case
of a pledge, the bank, in the event of the seller’s default, has the right to sell out the pledge
and purchase the stipulated goods from the market in collaboration with the customer or
take away his advance payment out of the sale proceeds and return the balance to the owner.
If the bank gets its money back, it cannot be more than the price paid in advance, as the
advance price is like a debt outstanding on the seller. Purchase of the stipulated commodity
by the bank from the sale proceeds of the pledge should not result in any exploitation of the
customer. He, therefore, may be involved in the process.
24 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clauses 4/2 and 5/4, pp. 165, 166, 173.
25 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Salam, clause 5/6, p. 166.
26 Ibn Hajar, 1981, 4, pp. 433–434; see also AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Salam, clause 3/3, p. 165.


----- p.250 (pdf 278) -----


250 Understanding Islamic Finance
If a seller has furnished a personal surety, the latter will be liable to deliver the goods if
the former fails to do so. If revocation of the contract is required, only the seller is authorized
to revoke and not the surety; only the price paid will be taken in that case. The seller can,
with the permission of the purchaser, shift the liability to the transferee on the basis of
Hawalah, subject to acceptance by the latter. The liability of the surety or the transferee will
automatically cease if the contract of Bai‘ Salam is rescinded. As a result, the pledge will
also be released.
10.6 DISPOSING OF THE GOODS PURCHASED ON SALAM
First, the Salam buyer cannot sell the commodity onward before taking its delivery. There is
a difference of opinion among Muslim jurists regarding the legality of selling the purchased
goods in a Salam contract prior to taking delivery. The majority maintain that the Salam
purchaser is not allowed to enjoy ownership rights nor he has the right of disposal of such
goods until he has received them. 27 Therefore, the seller cannot resell an item, even at cost,
cannot contract its transference and cannot make it partnership capital. These jurists rely
on the tradition reported by Abu Daud and Ibn Majah: “Whoever makes Salam should not
transfer it to others”. 28 It is argued that in this Hadith, it is clear that the buyer should not
exchange the subject matter of Salam with any person. However, this is a weak tradition, as
pointed out by Hafiz Ibn Hajar. 29 Therefore, it cannot be the basis for any ruling. As indicated
earlier, Salam is an exception and the basis on which a person purchases a commodity
on Salam can be invoked for selling that commodity onward; from here we derive the
permission for Parallel Salam for disposal of the commodity.
Therefore, many jurists have given some relaxation. Ibn Taymiyah and Ibn al-Qayyim
maintained that there is no legal problem in exchanging the subject matter of Salam before
taking possession. If it is sold to a third party, it may be at the same price, a higher price or
a lower price. However, if it is sold to the seller himself, it should be at the same price or a
lower price but not at a higher price. Companion Ibn Abbas (Gbpwh) and Imam Ahmad have
the same view on the issue. This is also the Maliki view. However, they also disapprove of
reselling the subject matter of Salam before taking possession if it is a foodstuff. 30
The contemporary position of Muslim scholars is also divergent. Shaikh Nazih Hammad,
for instance, maintains that it is permissible to resell Salam goods before taking possession,
as maintained by Ibn Taymiyah and Ibn al-Qayyim, because there is no text from the Qur’ ¯an
or Sunnah, Ijma‘a or Qiy ¯as to prohibit this. On the contrary, the texts as well as the Qiy ¯as
convey its legality. 31 This view has also been backed by some other scholars. On the
other hand, many scholars have maintained that it is illegal to resell anything before taking
possession of it. 32
It seems logical to take into consideration the opinion of those who uphold the legality of
reselling Salam before taking possession, since there is no genuine text to prohibit that and as
27 Ibn Abideen, n.d., 4, p. 209; al-Buhuti, Kashshaf al-Qina, 3, p. 293; Al-Kasani, 1400 AH, 5, p. 214; Ibn Qudama, 1367 AH, 4,
p. 334.
28 Abu Daud, 1952, 2, p. 247.
29 Among its narrators is one person named Atiah, rejected by Muhaddiseen; see, Ibn Hajar, 1998, 3, No. 1203, p. 69.
30 Ibn Rushd, 1950, 2, p. 231.
31 Majalla Majma‘ al-Fiqh al-Islami, No. 9, 3, pp. 628–629.
32 Majalla Majma‘ al-Fiqh al-Islami, No. 9, 3, pp. 643–654.


----- p.251 (pdf 279) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 251
a result the ideas of parallel Salam and Sukuk, or certificates based on Salam, that are crucial
for the functioning of Islamic banks can be materialized. Transfer of ownership to the pur-
chaser means transfer of risk to him and at least the price risk of the commodity is transferred
as soon as the Salam agreement is executed. Otherwise, the legality of parallel Salam as has
been allowed in the current framework of Islamic finance would become doubtful.
The possibility of having negotiable Salam certificates is yet to be decided. So far, the
majority of the contemporary scholars have not accepted this. To be on the safer side, we
may not allow actual or constructive delivery of the Salam goods before taking possession,
but if banks maintain inventory of various types of goods, any units of which are sold out
of inventory without identification of the particular units, it could be acceptable.
10.6.1 Alternatives for Marketing Salam Goods
There are a few options for disposing of or marketing the goods purchased through Salam.
The options available to Islamic banks are: (i) enter into a Parallel Salam contract; (ii) an
agency contract with any third party or with the customer (seller); and/or (iii) sale in the
open market by the bank itself by entering into a promise with any third party or direct
selling upon taking delivery. One thing must be clear, however, that such goods cannot be
sold back to the Salam seller. Hence, Parallel Salam cannot be entered into with the original
seller – this is prohibited due to being buy-back. Even if the purchaser in the second contract
is a separate legal entity but owned by the seller in the first contract, this would not amount
to a valid Parallel Salam agreement.
One deviation from the above principle would be that after settlement of the Salam
transaction, i.e. transfer of ownership/risk to the bank (buyer), there might be a totally
separate Murabaha or Musawamah deal with the same client. The State Bank of Pakistan,
while giving the Shar ¯ı´ah essentials of Islamic modes of financing, has allowed this option. 33
Accordingly, one Islamic bank in Pakistan had been selling carpets purchased through Salam,
the day after the culmination of Salam, to the Salam seller, who used to export the carpets as
per the concerned L/C. However, as the majority of Shar ¯ı´ah scholars were not inclined to
accept this arrangement, the bank shifted to the alternative of appointing the client as agent
to export the goods on behalf of the bank. We give hereunder the procedure of the above
options.
A bank may take a promise from any third party that he will purchase the goods of
stipulated specification at any stipulated price. This promise would be binding on the
promisor, and in case of breach of promise, he would be liable to make up the actual loss to
the promisee. The bank also has the option of waiting to receive the commodity and then
selling it in the open market for cash or deferred payment. In this case, it may have to create
an inventory that could be useful for the bank from a business point of view, subject to
proper risk mitigation and the concerned regulatory framework.
Agency Contract
If the bank considers that it is not suitable for it to keep inventory of the goods and/or it
has no expertise to sell the commodities received under a Salam contract, it can appoint
any third party or the customer as its agent to sell the commodity in the market. It is
33 SBP website: http://www.sbp.gov.pk/departments/ibd.htm


----- p.252 (pdf 280) -----


252 Understanding Islamic Finance
necessary, however, that the Salam agreement and agency agreement should be separate and
independent from each other. A price can be determined in the agency agreement at which
the agent will sell the commodity, but if the agent is able to get a higher price, the benefit
can be given to the agent. 34
Parallel Salam
In Salam, both the seller and the buyer can enter into a parallel contract. The bank, as seller,
can sell the goods on Parallel Salam on similar conditions and specifications as it previously
purchased on the first Salam, without making one contract dependent on the other. The date
of delivery in the parallel contract can be the same as that of the original Salam. This does
not come under prohibition in any way. Similarly, the seller can enter into a parallel contract
to enable him to deliver the agreed commodity at the agreed time.
If the seller in the first Salam contract breaches his obligation, the buyer (the injured
party) has no right to relate this breach/default to the party with whom he concluded a
Parallel Salam. The two contracts cannot be tied up and performance of one must not be
made contingent on the other. The delivery date in the parallel contract can be the same as
in the original Salam contract, but not earlier than that, as this would mean sale of goods
which one does not possess. There must be two separate and independent contracts, one
where the bank acts as buyer and another in which it is a seller. 35
Getting Promise for Purchase
A Salam purchaser may like to get a promise from any third party whereby the latter will buy
the commodities of specified quality and quantity at a mutually agreed price. The delivery
date of the Salam goods can be the delivery date in the promise. The bank (as promisee)
may take earnest money (Hamish Jiddiyah) from the promisor and if the latter backs out,
the bank will have the right to cover the actual loss from the earnest money. In the case of
promise, prepayment of price by the promisor would not be necessary, and this is the edge
of the promise option over the option of Parallel Salam for disposing of goods purchased
on the basis of Salam.
10.7 SALAM – POST EXECUTION SCENARIOS
After execution of the Salam contract, a number of situations could arise.
10.7.1 Supply of Goods as Per Contract
The seller delivers the commodity with the stipulated features at the due time and place of
delivery. The bank (buyer) takes delivery and the transaction culminates smoothly; the bank
will dispose of the commodity as per its plan.
34 The AAOIFI has described the permission for appointing the client bank’s agent for sale of the subject matter of Istisna‘a (see
p. 185, clause 6/6 of Istisna‘a Standard; this implies that such agency is also possible in the case of Salam. See also Hasanuz
Zaman, 1991, p. 457).
35 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Salam, clause 6, pp. 167, 173.


----- p.253 (pdf 281) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 253
10.7.2 Failure in Supply of Goods
The seller defaults and does not deliver the goods, saying, for example, that he was unable
to produce goods of the agreed quality or the required quantity. The Salam buyer shall have
the following options: 36
• to wait until the commodity is available;
• to cancel the contract and recover the paid price;
• to agree to a replacement with mutual consent and subject to the relevant rules.
The bank will ask the client to acquire the goods, or part thereof, from the market for
supply to it as per the contract, and if the customer is unable to do so, the bank will sell
the pledge/collateral given by the client in the market, purchase the commodity (the subject
of Salam) from the market with the proceeds and give the remainder amount, if any, to the
customer. If the proceeds are not sufficient to procure the goods as per the contract, the bank
has the right to ask the customer to make good the deficit.
It is pertinent to observe here that the bank has the right to take the goods that it is
purchasing from the proceeds of the security, but if it decides to get cash from the customer,
it has the right to get only the price given in advance at the time of the contract. The price
paid in advance by the bank amounts to a debt in the hands of the seller for the entire
period until the goods are delivered. If the contract stands rescinded, the amount of debt will
have to be refunded without any increase or decrease. The same amount of money will be
returned without any consideration to the increase or decrease in its relative value.
10.7.3 Supply of Inferior Goods
Another situation may be that the seller supplies goods inferior to what had been agreed
upon and thus forces the bank to either accept those inferior goods or to rescind the contract.
This will put the bank in an embarrassing situation. Disputes regarding quality of the goods
can be adjudicated by any institution having expertise in the area. A clause to this effect
can be inserted in the Salam agreement at the time of the contract. The bank would not be
obliged to accept the goods if their quality is judged to be inferior. It may, however, agree
to acceptance, may be even at a discounted price. It may also make adjustment for superior
quality or additional quantity. 37 There may be a number of solutions to this problem, and
some of these are as follows:
1. The bank may refuse to accept the goods and insist on the supply of the agreed goods
according to the procedure given in Section 10.7.2, or get the price paid at the time of
contract back.
2. If the seller is not able to supply the agreed item, and the item is absolutely out of stock
in the accessible market, the bank may ask the seller to supply any other goods.
3. If the seller can only partly supply the agreed goods, the bank may accept the same and
revise the purchase order to the extent of the remaining quantity, or it may claim a refund
of the balance.
Solution 1 above will be permissible provided it does not involve the return of a price
that is different from what the bank had paid. As to solution 2, the substitution is allowed
36 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clause 5/8.
37 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clause 5/3.


----- p.254 (pdf 282) -----


254 Understanding Islamic Finance
with some conditions. The rules applicable for substitution are that the new commodity
must also be fungible and not nonfungible – every unit of which is different in quality and
price than the other units – and its value should not be more than the value of the Salam
commodity. The new commodity should not be of the same genus as that of the original
Salam commodity; for example, if the subject of the Salam was wheat, it can be substituted
by cotton but not by corn or other animals owned by the customer. Both parties will mutually
decide the present market price of the original Salam goods and enter into a sale agreement
for the new commodity.
This will be done only when the agreed item is absolutely out of stock in the accessible
market. If the item is available, the seller is obliged to buy it for delivering the same to the
bank, whatever the market price may be. It is possible that the seller may require additional
finance for purchasing the item to deliver it to the bank. He may approach the same bank for
a facility to discharge the liability, but the new facility or advance so made by the bank will
have to be treated as a separate transaction. Under no circumstances may the two contracts
be tied up.
As regards solution 3 involving part delivery of the item, the bank may resort to any of the
solutions given above for the remainder amount of the goods. It has to accept the available
quantity of the contracted item; for the remaining amount, it can get back the part of the
price it has paid. If the seller becomes insolvent and absolutely incapable of honouring the
commitment at any time in the near future, he will be treated like an insolvent debtor.
10.8 SALAM-BASED SECURITIZATION – SALAM
CERTIFICATES/SUKUK
Salam certificates representing a sort of forward contract can be issued against the future
delivery of a commodity, product or service. In countries with large public sectors or where
the governments have substantial deposits of natural resources, such as petroleum, copper,
iron, etc., they can issue certificates for the future delivery of such products, which are
fully paid for on the spot by investors, who receive certificates of purchase in return. For
example, a country that produces oil may want to expand its refining facilities. It may sell
oil products through Salam instead of borrowing on the basis of interest and use the price
received in advance.
The Salam purchaser can choose to hold onto the Salam contract and receive the shipment
on the designated date, or he may elect to sell the goods involved in the contract through
Parallel Salam before the date of delivery, at whatever possible market price, to another
investor. He could also issue Salam Sukuk or certificates (SC) against the price paid for
future delivery of the oil products. An SC may change hands between the beginning of the
contract and its date of maturity. Actual delivery and receipt, and not just paper settlement,
are binding on the SC issuer or the final holder of the certificate. The essential feature of
Salam certificates is the fact that the issuer’s obligation towards the investor is not different
from what the market in the real sector pays on the due date of payment.
Salam certificates are geared to a specific commodity or project. People who purchase SCs
share income from those commodity/projects, and as such their income is not guaranteed,
although it can be quasi-fixed. Since the Salam certificates tie finance, production and sale
of the items involved into one contract, the risk of changing prices of the subject of Salam
belongs to those who invest in them, i.e. the Salam purchasers.
The investors in Sukuk have to bear counterparty as well as market risks. The counterparty
risk would arise with regard to the possibility of the seller being unable to deliver the goods.


----- p.255 (pdf 283) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 255
The market risk would result from the buyer being unable to market the goods at the time
of delivery, or selling them at a sale price lower than the cost to him. These risks can be
mitigated by the structure of the deal.
In Bahrain, for example, aluminium has been designated the underlying asset for issuing
Salam Sukuk. The Bahrain government sells aluminium to the buyer in the future market.
The Bahrain Islamic Bank (BIB) purchases the aluminium and it has been nominated to
represent the other banks wishing to participate in the Salam transaction. As consideration for
this advance payment, the government of Bahrain issues Salam certificates and undertakes
to supply a specified amount of aluminium at a specified date.
10.9 SUMMARY OF SALAM RULES
• In Salam, the seller undertakes to supply specific goods to the buyer at a future date in
exchange for an advanced price fully paid on the spot.
• As the object of sale in Salam is a debt, payment of the price cannot be delayed, otherwise
it will be a sale of debt for debt, which is prohibited.
• The capital (price) of Salam is money, but it can also be a service or a usufruct.
• A debt of the buyer in Salam against the seller or against any third party cannot be used
as capital in Salam.
• The object of exchange must be fungible, clearly describable in terms of weight, size,
volume, colour, quality, grade, and the like in a way that avoids disputes in the future.
Negligible variation can be tolerated. Salam has to be in things that usually exist in
markets but are not in the possession of the seller at the time of contracting. The objects
of Salam can be agricultural, industrial or natural goods or any well-defined service.
• Salam cannot take place in money or currencies. Salam is not permitted for anything
specific like “this car”, land, buildings or trees or for articles whose value changes
according to subjective assessment.
• It must also be ensured that the commodity is able to be delivered when it is due.
• The place and time of delivery of the object have to be specified. Instalments in delivery
of the Salam goods are permissible.
• Salam goods can be delivered before the stipulated date if it does not cause the buyer
inconvenience/loss.
• Salam involves no cash settlement. Actual physical delivery is a must. However, if the
contract is rescinded for any reason, the actual price paid has to be recovered.
• The seller in Salam need not necessarily be an owner or a producer of the goods.
• The Salam contract is conclusive and binding. It can be altered or revoked only with the
consent of both parties.
• Banks should not offset their receivables for payment of the Salam price, as a Salam sale
cannot be contracted against a loan, or partly cash and partly loan, in which case the
contract will be effective only to the extent of the cash payment.
• If a bank advances money for more than one item, it will be advisable to lay down a
breakdown of the value of each item. This will facilitate readjustment of the contract in
case of its partial fulfilment. The contract should also expressly provide for the periods of
delivery of different items. The same will apply if the contract stipulates different places
of delivery.
• If the seller is willing to hand over the contracted goods on the due date, the bank is
duty-bound to take possession of the goods, failing which the former will be absolved of
his liability. The bank can refuse to accept the goods only if the goods do not fulfil the


----- p.256 (pdf 284) -----


256 Understanding Islamic Finance
stipulated specifications or the same have been offered to it before the fixed date. The
bank’s refusal will be optional in the latter case.
• The bank, after entering into a Salam contract, can enter into a parallel contract or a
promise with any third party to sell the same commodity with the same specifications and
date of delivery. The two contracts would be enforceable separately and independently.
Box 10.1: Flow of Salam Transactions by Banks
SALAM
PURCHASERSALAM SELLER
Delivery of
Commodity
Salam on
CreditSalam Sale
ISLAMIC BANK
Purchaser Seller
21 3
1. The bank will purchase the item from client A with full prepayment of the price and
delivery on an agreed specified date.
2. The customer (seller) will deliver the commodity at the agreed time and place.
3. The bank will sell the commodity to any third party C by way of any of the following
alternatives:
— Parallel Salam with C for receipt of full payment;
— get a promise to purchase from C at any agreed price;
— appoint A its agent to sell it to any third party;
— wait until the goods are received and then sell in the market.
4. After taking delivery from A on the agreed date, the bank may make delivery to C
or any other purchaser.


----- p.257 (pdf 285) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 257
10.10 SALAM AS A FINANCING TECHNIQUE BY BANKS
Islamic banks have been in operation in various parts of the world for about a quarter of
a century, but they have not generally used Bai‘ Salam as a financing mode. The reason
may be that Salam has no practical advantage over (mark-up based) Murabaha–Mu’ajjal.
Its main conditions emphasize that the price fixed in the contract must be paid in full
in cash, immediately at the time of contract, and banks have to take delivery of goods
in the future, not money. Marketing the goods so received and any type of default, e.g.
delivery of inferior goods or failure in timely delivery, etc. may also cause problems for the
banks.
The practical problems in using this mode to finance agriculture, industry and other
commodity sectors can be easily imagined: taking delivery of the produce, assessing its
quality, then storing and disposing of it. But the banks perceive such problems when
they compare this with the conventional banking practice of not dealing in goods or the
easier way of entering into a Murabaha to Purchase Orderer with the client serving as
the bank’s agent. Once they realize the requirement of actual involvement in business,
avenues of risk mitigation in Salam and the fact that Salam is the only mode allowed
expressly by the holy Prophet (pbuh) himself, they will surely be inclined towards its
greater use.
Salam has its own benefits as well, particularly for farmers and SMEs. Further, it can
be more profitable for Islamic banks provided they are equipped with expertise in dealing
in commodities. It has great potential, which Islamic banks and financial institutions need
to realize. Of late, a number of IFIs have used Salam as a separate mode and also in
combination with Murabaha in respect of export financing. Below we shall discuss some
aspects of Salam as a financing mode.
Box 10.2: The Difference between Salam and Murabaha
Salam Murabaha
• In Salam, delivery of the purchased
goods is deferred; the price is paid on
the spot.
• In Murabaha, the purchased goods are
delivered on the spot; the price may
be either on the spot or deferred.
• In Salam, the price has to be paid in
full in advance.
• In Murabaha, the price may be on the
spot or deferred.
• Salam is not executed in the particular
commodity but the commodity is
specified by specifications.
• Murabaha is executed in particular
commodities.
• Salam cannot be executed in respect
of things which must be delivered on
the spot, e.g. Salam between wheat
and barley.
• Murabaha can be executed in those
things.


----- p.258 (pdf 286) -----


258 Understanding Islamic Finance
10.10.1 Risks in Salam and their Management
In Salam, Islamic banks may face the following risks:
• counterparty risk;
• commodity price risk;
• delivery risk/settlement risk;
• quality risk/low investment return or loss;
• asset holding risk/possibility of extra expenses on storage and Takaful;
• asset replacement risk (in case the bank has to buy from the market);
• fiduciary risk in case of Parallel Salam (the original Salam seller might not properly
perform with regard to delivery).
Box 10.3: Possible Risk Mitigation in Salam
Risks Management
1. Counterparty and delivery risk
• Since the price of Salam goods is given
in advance, the customer may default
after accepting the payment.
• The bank can liquidate the security
and can purchase the same goods
from the market.
• In the case of different goods and
consignments, there could be disputes
regarding price, quantity and quality.
• In the Salam MoU, time, quality,
quantity and the time of each
commodity must be given.
• Defective goods could be supplied. • Collateral/security and performance
bonds can be taken to mitigate the
loss.
• Goods may be delivered late. • A penalty clause can be embedded
in the contract as a deterrent
against late delivery. The penalty
amount would go to charity.
2. Commodity – price risk
• Since the nature of a Salam contract is
the forward purchase of goods, the price
of the commodity may be lower than the
market price or the price that was
originally expected/considered to be in
the market at the time of deliver.
• The bank can undertake Parallel
Salam and can also take a “promise
to purchase” from a third party.
3. Commodity – marketing risk
• The bank might not be able to market the
goods timely, resulting in possible asset
loss and locking of funds in goods.
• The bank should purchase only
those goods which have good
marketing potential and take
binding promises from prospective
buyers along with a sufficient
amount of Hamish Jiddiyah.


----- p.259 (pdf 287) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 259
Making the Salam seller the bank’s
agent to dispose of the goods is
also a good risk-mitigating tool.
4. Asset-holding risk
• The Islamic bank has to accept the goods
and bear the holding cost up to the point
of onward delivery.
• This cost may be recovered in
parallel transactions with proper
market survey, feasibility and
study of the traders’ practice in the
relevant area.
5. Early termination chances
• The client may refund the price taken in
advance and refuse to supply the goods.
• Salam is a binding contract; the
seller cannot unilaterally terminate
the contract. A penalty can be
embedded in the contract to
discourage this practice; the
penalty amount would go to
charity.
6. Parallel Salam
• The original seller might not supply the
goods at the settled time; the buyer in
Parallel Salam may sue the bank for
timely supply.
• The bank may purchase a similar
asset from the spot market for
supply to the buyer and recover the
loss, if any, from the seller in the
original Salam.
Box 10.4: Case Study 38
Bank SoldCommodity for
Rs. 110 M
Commodity for
Rs. 100 M
Options for the Bank
 
Parallel Salam
 Agent (Farmer)
 Prior Promise to Purchase
 Murabaha
Amount – Spot
Commodity – Deferred
Farmer
38 The author is grateful to Mr Omer Mustafa Ansari of Fords Rhodes Sidat Hyder & Co., Karachi for his help in the preparation
of the case studies on Salam and the flowcharts.


----- p.260 (pdf 288) -----


260 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 10.4: (Continued)
1. Farmer A or a grain dealer executes a Salam contract on 1st January to sell 5000
tons of wheat in advance for Rs. 100 million to bank B.
2. Bank B pays Rs. 100 million on the spot on 1st January to A and also stipulates
from where to take delivery on 1st May.
3. B enters into a promise wit hC–C undertakes that he will purchase wheat from B
for Rs. 115 million on 1st May against Hamish Jiddiyah of Rs. 15 million.
4. A supplies 5000 tons of wheat to B on 1st May; B informs C to execute sale and
take delivery.
5. C executes the sale and takes delivery from B and signs a promissory note for
Rs. 100 million.
Box 10.5: Salam – Preshipment Export Financing
1. Customer A gets a purchase order from abroad for the export of rice costing Rs. 1.1
million.
2. A approaches Islamic bank B to get finance on the basis of Salam.
3. The foreign importer opens an L/C in favour of B to the amount of Rs. 1.1 million
and sends it through a negotiating bank to B. (an L/C can also be opened in the name
of A under an agency agreement.)
4. The bank enters into a Salam agreement with A; pays Rs. 1 million in advance for
purchase of 1000 tons of defined quality rice to be delivered on 1st January, 2007.
B also signs an agency agreement with A to export rice as the bank’s agent.
5. A supplies 1000 tons of rice to the bank on 1st January, 2007. Henceforth, B is the
owner of the risk and reward of the rice.
6. A arranges shipment of the rice, as agent of B under the L/C.
7. The bank gets the proceeds of the L/C as per its terms and conditions.
8. As B is the owner of the rice, it will be responsible if the order is cancelled for any reason,
or the consignment is damaged. The Takaful expense, if any, will be borne by B.
Box 10.6: Salam and Refinance by the Central Banks (CBs)
The process flow will be as below:
1. The CB and an Islamic bank B will create a Musharakah investment pool; the bank’s
part of the capital will consist of mutually decided assets of B, like its investment in
stocks fulfilling the Shar¯ı´ah compliance criteria, Ijarah assets/contracts and Murabaha
receivables (less than 33 %), etc.
2. B will provide export finance to exporters under Salam and inform the CB, along
with its proof.
3. The CB will invest in the pool the amount equivalent to the export finance given
by B.


----- p.261 (pdf 289) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 261
4. It would be agreed while opening the Musharakah pool that all the time, the share of
the CB will be (_____) % of the total pool size.
5. Income received from the pool assets will be distributed between the CB and B as per
the ratio agreed in the beginning of each accounting period, may be a month or a quarter.
6. The CB and B can agree that profit over and above a certain level will be used for
creating “Reserves” that could be used for any shortfall in profits in future.
Box 10.7: Salam for Working Capital Finance 39
1. Sugar mill A needs working capital and approaches bank B on 1st October, 2007.
2. B offers A a Salam agreement for the purchase of sugar from it (at this point the
bank can appoint A its agent for sale of the sugar when received, or get a promise to
buy from any third party, or arrange for Parallel Salam; let us assume that it enters
into an agency agreement that is independent of the Salam agreement).
Sugar Mill
Options Available for Sale
Bank
 Market
Future
Today
Agency Relationship Direct Agent / Broker
Rs.20 M Rs.19 M 
3. B indicates a target price, i.e. Rs. 20 per kg for the sale of sugar in the market by A
as its agent.
4. A sells sugar of a defined quality at Rs. 19 per kg to be delivered on 31st December,
2007 and receives the proceeds in advance.
5. A delivers the sugar on 31st December, 2007; upon taking physical or constructive
possession, it comes under the liability/risk of B.
6. If A sells sugar in the market as an agent of B at Rs. 21 per kg, for example, one
rupee per kg could be his service fee, if the bank agrees.
7. If prices fall and sugar is sold at Rs. 18 per kg (for example), despite effort by A, B
will have to suffer the loss.
39 Prepared by Mr Omer Mustafa Ansari of Fords Rhodes Sidat Hyder & Co., Karachi.


----- p.262 (pdf 290) -----


262 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 10.8: Accounting Treatment by Islamic Banks in Salam and Par-
allel Salam
Initial recognition
• Salam financing is recognized when paid to the seller or made available to him.
• Parallel Salam is recognized when the bank receives the price.
• Initial measurement of capital/price will be made at the amount of cash paid or at
fair value of the asset if capital is provided in kind.
Measurement at the end of the financial period
• Capital is measured in the same way as in the initial measurement; however, if
delivery of the commodity is not probable in full or in part or its value declines, the
Islamic bank will make provision for the estimated deficit.
• Salam financing transactions are presented as “Salam Financing” in financial state-
ments.
• Parallel Salam transactions are presented as “Liability” in financial statements.
Receipt of the commodity
1. A commodity received is recorded as an asset at historical cost.
2. For receipt of commodities of different quality:
• if the market value is equal to the contracted value, the commodity shall be recorded
at book value;
• if the market value is lower than the book value, the commodity shall be measured
and recorded at market value at the time of delivery and the difference shall be
recognized as loss.
3. Failure to receive the commodity on the due date:
• if delivery is extended, the book value shall remain as it is;
• if the Salam contract is cancelled and the client does not repay the capital, the
amount shall be recognized as a receivable due from the client.
4. Failure to receive the commodity due to the client’s misconduct:
• if the Salam contract is cancelled and the client does not repay the capital, the
amount shall be recognized as a receivable due from the client;
• in the case where securities pledged for the commodity are less than its book value,
the difference is recognized as a receivable due from the client, or, alternatively, a
credit to the client if the proceeds are more than the book value.


----- p.263 (pdf 291) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 263
Measurement of the value of the commodity at the end of a financial period
• A commodity acquired through Salam shall be measured at the lower of the historical
cost or the cash equivalent value, and if the cash equivalent value is lower, the
difference shall be recognized as loss.
Recognition of result – delivery of the commodity
• Upon delivery of the commodity in a Parallel Salam transaction, the difference
between the amount paid by the client and the cost of the commodity shall be
recognized as profit or loss.
10.11 ISTISNA‘A (ORDER TO MANUFACTURE)
10.11.1 Definition and Concept
Istisna‘a, like Salam, is a special kind of Bai‘ where the sale of a commodity is transacted
before the commodity comes into existence. The legality of Istisna‘a is accepted by the
Shar¯ı´ah scholars because it does not contain any prohibition, it has always been a common
practice in the world and also because of ease for human beings. Renowned contemporary
jurist Zuhayli writes:
“Istisna‘a evolved into Islamic jurisprudence historically due to specific needs in the areas of
manual work, leather products, shoes, carpentry, etc. However, it has grown in the modern era
as one of the contracts that make it possible to meet major infrastructure and industrial projects
such as the building of ships, airplanes and other large machinery. Accordingly, the promi-
nence of the commission to manufacture contract has increased with the scope of the financed
projects.”40
Istisna‘a is a valid contract and a normal business practice. As a financing mode it has
been legalized on the basis of the principle of Istihsan (public interest). 41 Istisna‘a is an
agreement culminating in a sale at an agreed price whereby the purchaser places an order to
manufacture, assemble or construct (or cause so to do) anything to be delivered at a future
date. It becomes an obligation of the manufacturer or the builder to deliver the asset with
agreed specifications at the agreed period of time.
As the sale is executed at the time of entering into the Istisna‘a contract, the contracting
parties need not renew an exchange of offer and acceptance after the subject matter is
prepared.42 This is different from the promise in a contract of Murabaha to Purchase Orderer,
which requires formal offer and acceptance by the parties when possession of the items to
be sold is taken by the bank. Istisna‘a can be used for providing the facility of financing the
manufacture/construction of houses, plant, projects, building of bridges, roads and highways,
etc. The price must be fixed with the consent of the parties involved.
40 Zuhayli, 2003, p. 267.
41 Islamic Fiqh Council of the OIC, Resolutions, No. 65 (3/7), pp. 137, 138; AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 191. For details about Istisna‘a,
see Zuhayli, 2003, pp. 267–279.
42 This is because Istisna‘a is a sale contract and not a mere promise; see Zuhayli, 2003, pp. 269, 270; See also AAOIFI, 2004–5a,
Standard on Istisna‘a, clause 2/2/2, p. 179.


----- p.264 (pdf 292) -----


264 Understanding Islamic Finance
In Istisna‘a, the manufacturer arranges both the raw material and the labour. If material
is supplied by the purchaser and the manufacturer is required to use his labour and skill
only, this is the contract of Ujrah (doing any job against an agreed wage/remuneration)
and not of Istisna‘a. In the following sections we discuss elements of Istisna‘a in
detail.
An Istisna‘a contract is binding on the contracting parties; the manufacturer is obliged to
supply the subject matter with the agreed specifications and the orderer or buyer is obliged
to accept the asset of stipulated type, quality and quantity and make the agreed payment.
The parties may agree to a period during which the manufacturer will be responsible for any
defects or the maintenance of the subject matter. 43
10.11.2 Subject Matter of Istisna‘a
Istisna‘a is a sale contract applicable to items to be manufactured that are identified by
specification not by designation. This contract is valid only for those objects that have to be
manufactured or constructed. But it is not necessary that the seller himself manufactures the
item, unless stated in the contract. The subject of Istisna‘a (the thing to be manufactured or
constructed) must be known and specified to the extent of removing any ignorance or lack
of knowledge of its kind, type, quality and quantity.
The sellers agree to provide the subject matter transformed from raw materials through
manufacturing or goods manufactured by human hands. It is invalid for natural things or
products like animals, corn, fruit, etc. Both unique and homogeneous types of assets are
covered under Istisna‘a provided their specifications are agreed at the time of the contract.
For example, items of unique description that have no regular market, have no substitute
in the market and where the value of each unit of that type of goods may be different, are
covered by Istisna‘a.
Istisna‘a is not confined to what the manufacturer himself makes after the contract.
The specifications demanded by the buyer and agreed between the parties are important.
The seller/manufacturer will be fulfilling his obligation if he brings in an asset conform-
ing to all agreed specifications, unless otherwise agreed in the contract that the seller
will himself manufacture the asset. In other words, the contract is binding according to
specifications.
It is not permissible that the subject matter of an Istisna‘a contract be an existing and
identified asset. 44 For example, it is invalid for an Islamic bank to conclude a contract to
sell a particular designated car from a factory on the basis of Istisna‘a. But an asset that
has already been produced by the seller or by another can become the subject matter of
Istisna‘a provided that it is not identified in the contract and the contract identifies speciation
only.45
An Istisna‘a contract may be drawn for real estate developments on designated land owned
either by the purchaser or the contractor, or on land in which either of them owns the
usufruct. It is allowed because the contract involves the construction of specified buildings
that will be built and sold according to specification and, in this case, the contract of Istisna‘a
does not specify a particular identified place.
43 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clause 3/1/7, p. 181.
44 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clauses 3/1/2, 3/1/3, pp. 180, 191.
45 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 192.


----- p.265 (pdf 293) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 265
An Istisna‘a contract must definitely state, in clear terms, the type, dimensions, period
and place of delivery of the asset. The asset can be manufactured or produced by any or a
specific manufacturer, or manufactured from specific materials or any materials available in
the market, as may be agreed between the two parties.
The manufacturer (seller) may enter into a contract with a manufacturer to provide the
subject matter of Istisna‘a. On this basis, the banks may undertake financing based on
Istisna‘a by getting the subject of Istisna‘a manufactured through another such contract.
Thus, Islamic banks can serve both as manufacturers (sellers) and purchasers in Istisna‘a.
10.11.3 Price in Istisna‘a
The price in Istisna‘a can be in the form of cash, any tangible goods or usufruct of identified
assets. Usufruct as consideration for an Istisna‘a contract is relevant to situations where
government institutions offer usufruct of the asset being built for an agreed time period,
commonly known as “build, operate and transfer” (BOT).
The price should be known in advance to the extent of removing ignorance or lack of knowl-
edge and dispute. It is permissible that the price of Istisna‘a transactions varies in accordance
with variations in delivery date. There is also no objection to a number of offers being subject
to negotiation, provided that eventually only one offer is chosen for concluding the Istisna‘a
contract. This is to avoid uncertainty and lack of knowledge that may lead to dispute.
The price, once settled, cannot be unilaterally increased or decreased. However, as manu-
facturing of huge assets may involve more time, sometimes necessitating many changes, the
price can be readjusted by the mutual consent of the contracting parties because of making
material modifications to the item to be manufactured or due to unforeseen contingencies or
changes in prices of the inputs.
It is not necessary in Istisna‘a that the price is paid in advance (unlike Salam, in which
spot payment of price is necessary). 46 The price can be paid in instalments within the agreed
time period and can also be linked with the completion stages. 47 Against the general rule set
out for Salam, contemporary scholars have legalized it on the basis of analogy and Istihsan
as it involves personal labour, effort and commitment of the seller, which makes the contract
similar to a leasing contract, in which it is permissible to defer the payment of the rental
without that being considered a sale of debt for debt. 48 Further, the construction of huge
plants may require a long gestation period and also payment through instalments, according
to the pace of implementation of such projects.
A contract of Istisna‘a cannot be drawn up on the basis of a Murabaha sale, for example,
by determining the price of Istisna‘a on a cost-plus basis. This is because the subject matter
of Murabaha should be something already in existence, its cost should be known and it
should be owned by the seller before conclusion of Murabaha, so that a profit margin may
be added to that. None of these is a requirement of Istisna‘a. 49
The bank may be acting either in the capacity of the manufacturer or of the purchaser, and
may give or demand a security deposit (‘Arb ¯un), which may be considered as part of the
46 This is the view of most of the Hanafi jurists; many jurists, including Imams Malik, Shafi‘e, Ahmad, Zufar (Hanafi) and others,
allow Istisna‘a on the conditions of Salam, the most important of which is full prepayment; The majority of Hanafi jurists allow
some relaxations on the basis of juristic approbation (Istihsan) and analogy and also because of common usage of this contract
without any explicit prohibition. See Zuhayli, 2003, pp. 271, 272.
47 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clauses 3/2/2 to 3/2/4, p. 182.
48 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 192.
49 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 193.


----- p.266 (pdf 294) -----


266 Understanding Islamic Finance
price if the contract is completed, and can be forfeited if the contract is rescinded. However,
the amount forfeited may be restricted to the amount of actual damage suffered and the
remaining amount may preferably be returned to the customer. 50
10.11.4 Penalty Clause: Delay in Fulfilling the Obligations
An Istisna‘a contract may also contain a penalty clause stipulating an agreed amount of
money for compensating the purchaser adequately if the manufacturer is late in delivering
the asset. Such compensation is permissible only if the delay is not caused by intervening
contingencies ( force majeure ). Further, it is not permitted to stipulate a penalty clause
against the purchaser for default in any payment because this would be Riba. 51 A voluntary
rebate for prepayment is permissible, provided it is not agreed in the contract.
It can be agreed, in other words, between the parties that in the case of delay in delivery,
the price shall be reduced by a specified amount. The scholars have contended this on the
basis of analogy. The classical jurists allowed such a condition in Ijarah, e.g. if a person
hires the services of a tailor, he may tell him that the wage will be 10 dirhams if he prepares
the clothes within a week and 12 if within two days. By analogy, experts allow a penalty
clause in the Istisna‘a agreement in the case of a delay in delivery, supply or construction
of the subject of Istisna‘a.
In Fiqh, this principle is termed Shart-e-Jaz ¯ai (penalty condition), or the condition of
decreasing the price on account of a delay in delivery of the subject matter of Istisna‘a. 52
This reduction will enhance the income of the orderer (purchaser) and it will not go to
charity, as in the case of all other modes. This special permission is on account of the fact
that, in Istisna‘a, timely completion of the work depends on labour and commitment of the
manufacturer (seller). If he does not devote full time to completion of the job of a particular
contract and engages in other contracts in his quest for more and more orders and maximum
earnings, he can be fined. This benefit would go to the purchaser, who might suffer in the
case of nondelivery at the stipulated time. Any such undertaking by the manufacturer would
be binding on him.
Contrary to this, in Salam, any penalty taken for late delivery by the Salam seller will go
to charity, because in Salam, the price paid in advance creates a debt liability on the seller
which has to be paid without any increase. Even this penalty is permissible only if the delay
is not caused by intervening contingencies ( force majeure ). However, it is not permitted to
stipulate a penalty clause against the purchaser (from the bank, for example) for default on
payment.
10.11.5 The Binding Nature of an Istisna‘a Contract
Istisna‘a is nonbinding as long as the manufacturer does not start work on the subject matter
of the contract. Therefore, before the manufacturer starts the work, any one of the parties
may cancel the contract by giving notice to the other. However, after the manufacturer has
started the work, the contract cannot be cancelled by the buyer unilaterally. The majority
50 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clause 3/3/1, p.182.
51 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clause 6/7, pp. 186, 193, also see p. 32.
52 Zuhayli, 2003, p. 279.


----- p.267 (pdf 295) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 267
of contemporary Shar ¯ı´ah scholars, Civil Law in some Muslim countries like Jordan and
Sudan, the “Unified Arab Law” proposed by the League of Arab Countries and the Fiqh
Council of the OIC treat Istisna‘a as a “binding contract” provided that certain conditions
are fulfilled. If the asset conforms to the specifications agreed at the time of the Istisna‘a
contract, the purchaser is bound to accept the asset and he cannot exercise the option of
inspection (Khiyar al Ro‘yat). He, however, has the “option of defect” (Khiyar al ‘Aib) and
the option of specified quality, meaning that if the asset has any proven defect or lacks the
agreed specifications, the purchaser has the right to be indemnified.
10.11.6 Guarantees
The bank, acting either in the capacity of the manufacturer or of the ultimate purchaser,
can give or demand security, collateral or a performance bond to ensure that the work is
performed within the agreed time and as per specifications. It can also get ‘Arb ¯un, which will
either be part of the price if the contract is fulfilled, or forfeited if the contract is rescinded.
However, it is preferable that the amount forfeited be limited to an amount equivalent to the
actual damage suffered. 53
10.11.7 Parallel Contract – Subcontracting
Istisna‘a is not confined to what the manufacturer himself makes, and if the contract is
silent or it expressly allows such, the seller/supplier can get it manufactured as per the
specifications given in the contract from anyone else. Financial institutions, as sellers, would
contract with someone else to manufacture the same. This could be a case of a Parallel
Istisna‘a contract.
An Istisna‘a contract shall be entered into, on the one hand, between the bank and a
customer, while on the other hand, the bank may enter into a Parallel Istisna‘a with a third
party (contractor) for preparation of the subject matter of the first Istisna‘a. The delivery
date of the parallel contract must not precede the date of the original Istisna‘a contract.
In one contract, the bank will be the buyer and in the second, the seller. Ownership-
related risks of the two contracts will remain separate and will have to be borne by
the respective parties so long as the asset is not transferred to the other. 54 Each of the
two contracts shall be independent of the other. They cannot be tied up in a manner
whereby the rights and obligations of one contract are dependent on the rights and obli-
gations of the other contract. Further, Parallel Istisna‘a is allowed with a third party
only.
It is permissible for the bank to buy items on the basis of a clear and unambiguous
specification and to pay, with the aim of providing liquidity to the manufacturer, the price
in cash when the contract is concluded. Subsequently, the bank may enter into a contract
with another party in order to sell, in the capacity of manufacturer or supplier, items whose
specifications conform to the wishes of that other party, on the basis of Parallel Istisna‘a,
and fulfil its contractual obligation accordingly.
53 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clause 3/3, p. 182.
54 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clauses 7/1, 7/3, pp. 182, 186.


----- p.268 (pdf 296) -----


268 Understanding Islamic Finance
10.11.8 Istisna‘a and Agency Contract
The bank, acting either as a seller or as a buyer in Istisna‘a, can appoint any agent, with the
consent of the other party, to supervise the manufacturing process or to sell the asset when
received. It can ask the client/manufacturer to act as an agent to sell the subject matter. The
agency agreement should be separate and independent from the Istisna‘a agreement. Banks
that are using Istisna‘a normally appoint an agent for sale of the asset in the local or foreign
markets.
An agency contract can also be used if there is a delay on the part of the purchaser in
taking delivery of the subject matter within a particular period of time. The seller can sell
that asset in the market and pay the amount over and above his dues, if any, to the purchaser.
The bank can also engage any consultant firms to supervise the construction work and to
determine whether the subject matter conforms to the stipulated specifications or for other
advisory services. 55 The parties may mutually decide who will bear the related supervision
expenses.
10.11.9 Post Execution Scenario
Work in Progress
Before the manufacturer starts work on the subject matter of Istisna‘a, both of the parties
have the right to rescind the contract. Once the seller/manufacturer initiates the work, the
contract becomes binding and any change is possible only with mutual consent.
The parties to the contract are inevitably bound by all obligations and consequences
flowing from their agreement. The purchaser will make the payment as per the agreed
schedule and the manufacturer/seller will supply the asset as per the specifications agreed. If
the subject matter does not conform to the specifications agreed upon, the customer has the
option to accept or to refuse the subject matter. The purchaser shall not be regarded as the
owner of the materials in the possession of the manufacturer for the purpose of producing
the asset.
If the actual cost incurred by the bank (as seller) on an asset sold on Istisna‘a is less than
the forecast cost, or the bank gets a discount from the subcontractor on a Parallel Istisna‘a
basis, the bank is not obliged to give a discount to the purchaser and any additional profit,
or loss if any, pertains to the bank. The same rule adversely applies when the actual costs
of production are greater than the forecast costs. 56
If so desired by a customer, the Islamic bank (as purchaser) may replace an existing con-
tractor to complete a project which has already been commenced by the previous contractor.
For this purpose, the existing status of the project needs to be assessed, whereby the cost
of such assessment and all liabilities as of that date shall remain the responsibility of the
customer.
The bank, working as a manufacturer (seller), must assume liability for ownership risk,
maintenance and Takaful expenses prior to delivering the subject matter to the purchaser
as well as the risk of theft or any abnormal damage. The manufacturer cannot stipulate
in the contract of Istisna‘a that he is not liable for defects. Therefore, if the bank is the
manufacturer for the purpose of an Istisna‘a contract, it cannot absolve itself from loss on
55 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clauses 5, 6/6, p. 184.
56 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Istisna‘a, clause 3/2/6.


----- p.269 (pdf 297) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 269
this account. The orderer (purchaser) has the right to obtain collateral from the manufacturer
for the amount he has paid and as regards delivery of the commodity with specifications
and time of delivery.
A voluntary rebate for prepayment is permissible, provided it is not agreed in the contract.
Delivery and Disposal of the Subject Matter
1. Before delivery of the asset to the purchaser, it will remain at the risk of the seller; any loss
to the raw material or to the item in the process of manufacturing will be borne by him.
2. After delivery, risk will be transferred to the purchaser.
3. Possession of goods can be physical or constructive, depending upon the nature of
the asset and transfer of ownership/risk. Transferring risk and delegating authority of
use and utilization/consumption are the basic ingredients of constructive possession.
For this, there should be a demarcation line between handing over and taking over of
possession.57
4. If a manufactured asset is delivered before the agreed date, the purchaser should accept
it if the asset meets the stipulated specifications. He can refuse to accept the goods if
these are not as per the agreed specifications or there is some other genuine justification
for not accepting before the agreed date (Istisna‘a Standard, clauses 6/1 to 6/3).
5. If the condition of the subject matter does not conform to the contractual specifications
at the date of delivery, the ultimate purchaser has the right to reject the subject matter or
to accept it in its present condition, in which case the acceptance constitutes satisfactory
performance of the contract.
10.11.10 The Potential of Istisna‘a
Islamic banks can use Istisna‘a for manufacturing of high technology goods like aircrafts,
ships, buildings, dams, highways, etc. It can also be used for housing and export financ-
ing, meeting working capital requirements in industries where sale orders are received in
advance.58 Potential areas are given below:
• financing the construction industry – apartment buildings, hospitals, schools and
universities;
• development of residential/commercial areas and housing finance schemes;
• financing high technology industries such as the aircraft industry, locomotive and ship-
building industries.
10.11.11 Risk Management in Istisna‘a
Banks could face the following risks in Istisna‘a-based financing:
• settlement risk;
• price risk;
• delivery risk;
• possession risk;
• market risk.
57 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Istisna‘a, clause 6/4, p. 185.
58 For the potential of Istisna‘a, see Zuhayli, 2003, pp. 278, 279.


----- p.270 (pdf 298) -----


270 Understanding Islamic Finance
As a whole, risks in Istisna‘a would be mitigated by taking proper collateral, performance
bonds, technical expertise in the relevant areas for timely and effective marketing and for
ensuring cost effectiveness, by resorting to suitable Takaful policies, by choosing good clients
and by adopting suitable capital budgeting and liquidity management policies. Mitigation
for some of the risks is shown in Box 10.9. As little is available so far on the practical
application of Istisna‘a, we shall also give a number of hypothetical case studies.
Box 10.9: Risk Mitigation in Istisna‘a
Ownership of material
The Islamic bank is not the owner of the materials
in the possession of the manufacturer for the
purpose of producing the asset. It can have no claim
on it in the case of any nonperformance.
Security is available with
the bank.
Delivery risk
The bank may be unable to complete the
manufacturing of goods as scheduled due to late
delivery of completed goods by the subcontractor in
Parallel Istisna‘a.
On the basis of the rule of
“Shart-e-Jaz¯ai”, the bank
can put in the Istisna‘a
agreement a clause to reduce
the Istisna‘a price in the
case of delay.
Sale not permissible before delivery
Sale of Istisna‘a goods is not allowed before taking
physical possession. This may lead to asset, price
and marketing risk.
The bank can take a
“promise to purchase” from
a third party and can make
arrangements for sale
through agency.
Quality risk
The Islamic bank gets delivery of inferior quality
manufactured goods, which also may affect the
original contract.
The bank can obtain a
guarantee of quality from
the original supplier.
Box 10.10: Differences between Istisna‘a and Salam and Ijarah (Ujrah)
Istisna‘a Salam
1. The subject of Istisna‘a is always a thing
which needs manufacturing.
1. The Salam subject can be either
natural products or manufactured
goods.
2. The price in Istisna‘a does not
necessarily need to be paid in full in
advance.
2. The price has to be paid in full in
advance.


----- p.271 (pdf 299) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 271
3. Istisna‘a can mainly be conducted for
Qimi goods, all units of which are
different from one another in terms of
price/specification. But it can also be
used for items having trademarks
wherein all units might be similar in
price and specification.
3. The subject of Salam is a liability
on the seller and thus must consist
of fungible (Mithli) goods, all units
of which are similar, so that if the
seller is not able to produce the
goods by himself, he can get the
same from the market.
4. Penalty in the form of a reduction in
price on account of a delay in delivery
will reflect the income of the purchaser
(the principle of Shart-e-Jaz ¯ai approved
by the jurists.)
4. Penalty for late delivery shall go to
charity and the P&L Account of
the purchaser (bank) will be
unaffected.
5. As long as work has not started,
Istisna‘a is nonbinding; any of the parties
can revoke the contract.
5. Salam is a binding contract; once
executed, it cannot be rescinded
without the consent of the other.
Istisna‘a Ijarah (Ujrah)
1. The manufacturer uses his own materials
and the sale price is fixed.
1. The manufacturer on an Ujrah
basis uses the material provided by
the buyer and he is paid the agreed
wages.
2. Istisna‘a can be of anything that needs
manufacturing.
2. Ijarah can be only on those assets
the corpus of which is not
consumed with use.
3. In Istisna‘a, asset risk is transferred to
the purchaser soon after delivery of the
item to him and he has to pay the price
irrespective of what happens to the asset.
3. In Ijarah, asset risk remains with
the owner (lessor) and the lessee
has to give rental only if the asset
is capable of being used as per
normal market practice.
Box 10.11: Accounting Treatment by Islamic Banks (as Seller) in
Istisna‘a59
Istisna‘a costs
• Istisna‘a costs, including direct and indirect costs relating to the contract, shall be
recognized in an Istisna‘a work in progress account or Istisna‘a cost account in the
case of a parallel contract.
• The amount billed to al-Mustasni (buyer) shall be debited to an Istisna‘a receivable
account and credited to an Istisna‘a billing account.
59 See AAOIFI, 2004–5b, Accounting Standard on Istisna‘a, pp. 300–321.


----- p.272 (pdf 300) -----


272 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 10.11: (Continued)
• The balance of the Istisna‘a billing account shall be offset against the Istisna‘a
work in progress account.
• Any precontract cost shall be recognized as deferred costs and transferred to the
Istisna‘a work in progress account upon signing of the contract.
Contract costs in Parallel Istisna‘a
• Istisna‘a costs shall include the price fixed in a Parallel Istisna‘a contract.
• Progress billings to al-Mustasni (buyer) shall be debited to the Istisna‘a receivable
account and credited to the Istisna‘a billing account.
• The balance of the Istisna‘a billing account shall be offset against the Istisna‘a work
in progress account.
Istisna‘a revenue and profit
Istisna‘a revenue is the price agreed, including the Islamic bank’s profit margin on the
contract, and recognized in the financial statements using either of the following methods:
• percentage of completion method;
• completed contract method.
Deferred profits
These shall be recognized using either of the following methods:
• proportionate allocation (preferred method);
• as and when each instalment is received.
Early settlement
• On advance payment made by the buyer, the Islamic bank may waive part of its profit
that shall be deducted from both the Istisna‘a receivable account and the deferred
profits account.
• The above shall apply if the facts are the same except that the bank did not grant
a partial reduction of the profit when the payment was made, but reimbursed this
amount to the buyer after receiving the payments.
Parallel Istisna‘a revenue and profit
• Revenue and profit in Parallel Istisna‘a shall be measured and recognized according
to the percentage of completion method.
• The recognized portion of Istisna‘a profit shall be added to the Istisna‘a cost account.
• If the contract price or part is to be paid following the completion of the contract,
accounting treatments of deferred profits shall be applicable.
Change orders, additional claims and maintenance costs
Change orders and additional claims
• The value and cost of change orders shall be added to Istisna‘a revenue and costs,
respectively.
• If the required conditions for additional claims are met, an amount of revenue shall
be recognized equal to the additional cost caused by the claim.


----- p.273 (pdf 301) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 273
• If the required conditions are not met in full or in part for recognizing additional
claims, the estimated value of these claims shall be disclosed in notes to the financial
statements.
• If Parallel Istisna‘a exists, accounting treatments as mentioned above shall apply;
however, the cost of such shall be determined by the contractor with the approval of
the Islamic bank.
Maintenance and warranty costs
• These shall be recognized on an accrual basis and matched with recognized rev-
enue. Actual costs shall be charged against the maintenance and warranty allowance
account.
• If Parallel Istisna‘a exists, these shall be accounted for on a cash basis.
Measurement at the end of the financial period
• Istisna‘a work in progress shall be measured and reported at cash equivalent value if
applying the percentage of completion method for recognition of profit and revenue.
• Any expected loss at the end of the financial period shall be recognized and reported
in the income statement.
• In the case of Parallel Istisna‘a, the Istisna‘a cost shall be treated as mentioned above.
• Additional costs due to failure of a subcontractor shall be recognized as loss in the
income statement.
Box 10.12: Accounting Treatment by Islamic Banks (as Buyer) in
Istisna‘a
Istisna‘a billings of completed jobs
• Progress billings shall be debited to the Istisna‘a cost account and presented as
assets in financial statements and corresponding credit shall be made to the Istisna‘a
accounts payable account.
• The above accounting treatments shall also be applicable to a Parallel Istisna‘a
contract.
Receipt of commodity
• The commodity received, if meeting the specifications required, shall be recorded at
historical cost.
• If Parallel Istisna‘a exists, on delivery of the commodity to the client, the balance of
the Istisna‘a costs account shall be transferred to an asset account.


----- p.274 (pdf 302) -----


274 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 10.12: (Continued)
Late delivery of commodity
The Islamic bank shall take compensation from the performance bond in the case
of negligence or fault on the part of the seller. An allowance for doubtful debts
shall be made if the performance bond is not sufficient to cover the amount of
compensation.
Commodity not conforming to the specification
• If the commodity is declined by the bank due to nonconformity to specifications,
any unrecovered progress payments made to the seller shall be recorded as accounts
receivable and an allowance for doubtful debts shall be made, if necessary.
• If the bank does not decline a discrepant commodity, it shall be measured at the
lower of the cash equivalent value or the historical cost. Any loss shall be recognized
in the income statement in which the loss is realized.
Buyer refuses to receive the commodity (parallel contract)
On refusal to receive a commodity due to its being discrepant, it shall be measured at the
lower of the cash equivalent value or the historical cost. Any loss shall be recognized
in the income statement in which the loss is realized.
Box 10.13: Housing Finance through Istisna‘a 60
Rs. 5 million
+ Rent over a period 
of 10 years
BANK Rs. 5 M Rs. 2 M CUSTOMER
Spot
Deferred
Spot
CONTRACTOR
Rs. 7 M
(ISTISNA’A)
DIMINISHING MUSHARAKAH
60 The author is grateful to Mr Omer Mustafa Ansari of Fords Rhodes Sidat Hyder & Co., Karachi for his guidance on accounting
treatment and help in preparation of case studies on Istisna‘a and the flowcharts.


----- p.275 (pdf 303) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 275
The following could be the flow process:
1. Suppose a builder/contractor C has announced a scheme for the construction and sale
of apartments costing Rs. 7 million each. (He demands cash and has no financial
relationship with the bank.)
2. Client A decides to have an apartment; he has Rs. 2 million and needs financing
from bank B of Rs. 5 million for ten years.
3. A and B create a Musharakah pool of Rs. 7 million under the principle of Shirkatul-
milk and jointly enter into Istisna‘a agreements with C for the construction and sale
of an apartment of defined specifications and pay Rs. 7 million in four instalments.
4. C starts building the apartment as per the requirements of the Istisna‘a contract.
5. The bank appoints A its agent to supervise the construction work.
6. C hands over the apartment to A; B leases out its part of ownership to A in rent.
7. A purchases one unit of the bank’s part every month; the rental starts decreasing after
each payment and after ten years, the bank’s investment is redeemed and ownership
is transferred to the client. (See the rules of Diminishing Musharakah for the purpose
of housing finance in Chapter 12.)
Box 10.14: Istisna‘a for Preshipment Export Finance
Rs. 110 M 
(EXPORT
PROCEEDS)
BANK Rs. 100 M (ISTISNA‘A) CUSTOMER
EXPORT Rs. 110 M
AgentSpot
Deferred
Hypothetical case study:
1. Client A gets an export order for the export of ready-made garments of value Rs. 110
million.
2. A approaches bank B for financing and indicates that he has the expertise to prepare
the consignment.


----- p.276 (pdf 304) -----


276 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 10.14: (Continued)
3. B enters into an Istisna‘a agreement with A for the supply of garments of a specified
nature for Rs. 100 million within a period of three months. This contract will be a
sale; A will make delivery at the agreed time.
4. B also appoints A its agent for export of the garments when they come under its
ownership.
5. A foreign importer opens an L/C of value Rs. 110 million in the name of B (the
L/C can also be in the name of A but that would be under an agency agreement). If
an L/C has already been opened, Istisna‘a is not possible (avoiding Bai‘ al ‘Inah).
6. A prepares the garments and informs B to take delivery; the bank takes
actual/constructive delivery of the garments and henceforth the garments come under
its risk/liability.
7. A exports the consignment as agent of B, sending documents on behalf of B. B gets
Rs. 110 million, as per the terms of the L/C.
Box 10.15: Parallel Istisna‘a for Building Project Finance
Builder
Sale of Building
 (Flats or Offices) 
for Rs.120 M 
Plus Profit
Receivables assigned 
to Bank
Rs.120 M Bank
Deferred Spot
Rs 100 M Contractor
Hypothetical Case Study on a Building Project Financed through Istisna‘a:
1. Builder A enters into an Istisna‘a agreement with bank B for the construction of 100
economy flats within a period of 12 months, say up to 31/12/2007. The total cost is
agreed at Rs. 120 million.
2. A starts booking the flats and all the flats are booked with any amount of downpay-
ment.


----- p.277 (pdf 305) -----


Forward Sales: Salam and Istisna‘a 277
3. B enters into a Parallel Istisna‘a with contractor C for the construction of flats of the
same specifications against the total cost of Rs. 100 million up to the end of 2007
and makes payment in four instalments, as per the agreement.
4. B appoints A its agent to supervise the construction of flats, as per the agreed
specifications.
5. C gives possession of the flats at the end of December, 2007 to B, which hands them
over to builder A.
6. A sells the flats to the allottees on an instalment basis and assigns the receivables to
bank B.
7. The allottees will make periodical payments for rental and purchase of units from
the bank; ultimately, the ownership will transfer to the allottees.
Box 10.16: Parallel Istisna‘a – Government Projects
GOP/ Customer Rs.1200 Bank Rs. 1000 Million Contractor
Instal-
mentsDeferred
Receivables / Regular Income 
Assigned to the Bank
1. Government G wants a road to be built and enters into an Istisna‘a contract under
which bank B has agreed to build the road by the end of December, 2007 for Rs. 1200
million, payable in instalments over ten years.
2. B enters into a Parallel Istisna‘a with contractor C for building the road up to 31st
December, 2007 for Rs. 1000 million and pays the amount in four equal instalments.
3. C hands over the road to B on 31st December, 2007. Use of the road starts against
the payment of tolls.
4. G assigns the toll receipts to the bank, and in the case of a shortfall, pays rental
according to the agreement.


----- p.278 (pdf 306) -----




