
----- p.279 (pdf 307) -----


11
Ijarah – Leasing
11.1 INTRODUCTION
According to contemporary jurists and experts on Islamic finance, Ijarah has great potential
as an alternative to interest in respect of evolving a Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant financial system.
Ijarah is permissible according to Ijma‘a of jurists and the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars. As viewed by
Imam Shafi‘i and many other jurists, two verses of the Holy Qur’ ¯an, because of their general
nature, refer to the legality of Ijarah. Literally, Ijarah is derived from al-’Ajr and means
compensation, substitute, consideration, return or counter value (al‘Iwad). As a contract,
it refers to hiring or renting any asset/commodity to benefit from its usufruct. It also
encompasses the hiring of labour and any contract of work for anyone against a return
(wage). Therefore, broadly the rules and principles of labour, renting, Ju‘alah and all other
contracts for usufruct of goods and services are covered by the term Ijarah. Other terms,
used less frequently, for such contracts are Kir ¯a ’a and Istij ¯ar.
In Islamic law, Ijarah is a contract of a known and proposed usufruct of specified assets
for a specified time period against a specified and lawful return or consideration for the
service or return for the benefit proposed to be taken, or for the effort or work proposed
to be expended. 1 In other words, it is the transfer of usufruct for a consideration, which is
rent in the case of hiring assets or things and wages in the case of hiring people. According
to the jurists, Ijarah is the sale of usufruct (and not of ‘Ain or corporeal goods) of any
commodity in exchange of Ujrah, wages or rent, and covers houses, shops, riding/work
animals, jewellery, clothes, etc. 2
The permissibility of Ijarah is given in the Holy Qur’ ¯an, Sunnah of the holy Prophet
(pbuh) and consensus (Ijma‘a) of the Islamic jurists. 3 Letting goods for use is a general
kind of business activity legalized by the Shar ¯ı´ah as it is a convenient means for people
to acquire the right to use any asset that they do not own, as all people might not be able
to own the tangible assets for use. 4 This permissibility is subject to a number of conditions
described in books of Hadith and Islamic jurisprudence.
In this chapter we shall discuss in detail the rules relating to Ijarah of usufruct of goods
or leasing as a form of investment and a mode of financing that normally takes the form
of Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek. Ijarah of work or services will be discussed briefly where
deemed necessary.
1 Lane, 1956; Also see Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Majallah, Articles 405, 420, 421; Zuhayli, 2003, 1, pp. 386, 387; Qastalani, 1304 H,
IV, p. 124.
2 Al-Kasani, 1993, 4, pp. 452–457.
3 Al-Kasani, 1993, 4, pp. 552–556; Zuhayli, 2003, 1, pp. 385–388.
4 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, p. 151.


----- p.280 (pdf 308) -----


280 Understanding Islamic Finance
11.2 ESSENTIALS OF IJARAH CONTRACTS
As can be seen from the above given definition, the essentials of Ijarah are:
1. It is a contract.
2. Known usufruct is transferred.
3. Of a particular asset.
4. For a specified time period.
5. Against agreed-upon rental.
Like other contracts, parties to Ijarah have to be capable of entering into contracts. The
lessor provides the asset for benefit against rental. The lessee is considered “Ameen”, entitled
to use the asset against payment of the agreed-upon rental only for the purpose specified in
the agreement. 5 He is liable for loss to the asset due to his negligence, but cannot be made
liable for loss caused by factors beyond his control.
For the purpose of Ijarah, the subject matter giving usufruct can be divided into two types:
property or assets, like houses, vehicles, residences, etc., and labour, like the work of an
engineer, doctor, tailor, carpenter, etc. While the latter involves employing the services of a
person for a wage, the former relates to usufruct of any asset or property that is transferred
to another person in exchange for rent. Majallah divides the subject matter of leasing into
three types, where the third one is letting animals. 6 In this sense, the term Ijarah is analogous
to the term leasing as used in modern business terminology.
In terms of the factors of production, the asset being leased should belong to the category
of land – real assets that do not alter in original/physical form due to usage – meaning that
it should not be among the things that cannot be used without consuming their corpus, or a
financial or monetary asset. It also implies that the lessor, as owner of the asset, must bear
the expenses and risks that are related to ownership.
The consideration of lease is Ujrah (rent or hire of things) or Ajr (wages in hiring of
people). If consideration is fixed in the contract, it is called Ajr al-Musammah (agreed rent
or wage) and if it has to be determined by a judge or arbitrator, it is called Ajr al-Mithl.
11.2.1 Ijarah and Bai‘ Compared
Ijarah, in a way, is similar to the contract of sale, because in both cases something is transferred
to another person for a valuable consideration. Accordingly, the benefit and the consideration
in Ijarah must be known comprehensively to avoid conflict. However, the difference between
Ijarah and sale is that in the latter case, ownership of the corpus of the property is transferred
to the purchaser, while in the former, the corpus of the property remains in the ownership of
the transferor (lessor), and only its usufruct, i.e. the right to use it, is transferred to the lessee
against an agreed consideration and the ownership is not transferred. Ownership-related risks
and expenses have to be borne by the lessor. If the lessee becomes owner of the corporeal
property let in any way, such as by gift or inheritance, the Ijarah ceases to be in force.7
Another big difference between sale and lease contracts is that the latter is always time-
bound, meaning that the lease has to terminate at any point in time, while sale implies
5 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 7/1/4, p. 144.
6 Al-Atasi, 1403 H, Majallah, Article 421.
7 Al-Atasi, 1403 H, Majallah, Article 442.


----- p.281 (pdf 309) -----


Ijarah – Leasing 281
definite transfer of ownership of the sold asset just after the sale is executed, along with its
risk and reward.
11.3 GENERAL JURISTIC RULES OF IJARAH
Jurists are almost unanimous that Ijarah is valid for things which possess Manafa‘ah and
which can be hired or utilized but their corpus or substance (‘Ayn) is not consumed. 8 Goods
like candles, cotton, food or fuel are suitable for sale, not for leasing or hiring. 9 The great
Hanafi jurist Kasani explains that dirhams, dinars, bullion, etc. that are ‘Ain, not usufruct,
and all those goods taking benefit from which is not possible without consuming them cannot
be given on lease. Further, the genus of the subject matter (asset leased) and the rent should
not be the same, e.g. house for house, ride for ride, etc. 10
Therefore, lease cannot be undertaken in respect of money, edibles, fuel, ammunition,
etc. because their use is not possible unless they are consumed. If anything of this nature
is leased out, it will be deemed to be a loan and all the rules concerning the transaction
of loan shall accordingly apply. Any rent charged on this invalid lease would amount to
interest charged on a loan. Further, the assets/goods taking usufruct from which is almost
impossible, cannot become the subject of Ijarah, e.g. land hit by salinity to the extent that it
is not capable of any production cannot be leased out. 11
Ijarah is valid for permissible usufruct only with the consent of both parties to the lease
contract. The asset should belong to the lessor as owner or as lessee of the actual owner with
permission for sub-leasing. An asset jointly acquired or belonging to a number of people can
be leased to more than one lessee. 12 The contract should be free from any Gharar element
with respect to the nature of usufruct and its counter value and both parties should have
knowledge of the nature of the contracted usufruct. 13
The rent or rate of hiring or renting a property can be assessed/fixed only when the
property is known, whether by inspection, viewing or description. It is permissible to stipulate
conditions for expediting the payment of rent or for salary and its delay or deferment,
as agreed by the parties. The amount of rent or salary should be in accordance with the
convention or the tradition of the locality and must be just and acceptable to both parties.
The Holy Qur’ ¯an has ordained in respect of suckling infants/offspring that the recompense
of the suckling women should be just and reasonable. 14
Al-Kasani has mentioned a number of conditions for the validity of an Ijarah contract
with respect to the contracting parties and the asset or service hired. Important among these
conditions are the following:
• The contracted usufruct has to be ascertained to avoid any dispute. 15
• The lease period must be specified. However, in the case of a wage/service, any of the
two, i.e. the amount of work or the time period for a job should be known. 16
8 Zuhayli, 2003, pp. 387, 388; see also Jassas, 1999, 2, p. 395; AAOIFI, Standard on Ijarah, clause 5/1/1, pp. 142, 153.
9 Ibn-Hazm, 1988, 8, pp. 182–183.
10 Zuhayli, 2003, p. 402.
11 Al-Kasani, 1993, 4, p. 458.
12 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clauses 3/3, 3/6, pp. 140, 152.
13 Zuhayli, 2003, p. 391; Al-Kasani, 1993, p. 465.
14 Holy Qur’ ¯an, 65: 6.
15 Al-Kasani, 1993, p. 471.
16 Al-Kasani, 1993, pp. 475–483.


----- p.282 (pdf 310) -----


282 Understanding Islamic Finance
• Benefiting from the hired goods should be possible. As such, lease of a nonexistent asset
for usufruct of which a description cannot be determined precisely is not allowed, because
such Gharar about the description and the time may lead to disputes. In other words, the
purpose of the contract must be capable of being fulfilled and performed. 17
• The handing over/delivery of the contracted goods for taking their benefit is essential. No
rent becomes due merely because of execution of the contract, unless the subject of the
lease is delivered and made available to the lessee. However, advance rent can be taken
when availability is ensured for the period of the lease.
• In the case of workmen or service, the contracting person should be capable of undertaking
the job. Therefore, hiring a runaway animal for riding, or usurped assets is invalid. 18
• The usufruct of contracted goods must be lawful, meaning that the purpose of Ijarah
should not be unlawful or Haram. 19
• The usufruct should be conventional or according to the tradition of the people. 20
As indicated above, according to Hanafi jurists, rent does not become due merely with
the lease contract; the emergence of usufruct is necessary for this. Shawafi‘i however, are
of the view that rent becomes due and payable when the lease contract is finalized, because
they presume that the existence of the usufruct will be materialized by use of Mu’jar (asset
being leased) by the lessee. This implies that even according to Shawafi‘i, rent becomes due
when the asset is in the possession of the lessee and he is in a position to use it according
to his requirement. 21
If the asset to be leased is yet to be purchased as per the request of the prospective lessee,
the lessor can demand payment of earnest money to ensure the latter’s commitment to take
the asset on lease when purchased by him. If the customer breaches his promise and the
Ijarah contract is not executed for any reason attributable to the lessee, the lessor may retain
the amount of loss incurred by him in making and processing the lease contract, purchasing
the asset, leasing it to any other or disposing of it in the market, and give back what is in
excess of the actual cost and damage he has suffered.
According to the AAOIFI Standard, rental can be paid whenever it becomes due, in
instalments or at any time that is mutually agreed between the parties. The lessor can demand
advance rent that will be adjusted for rent becoming due when the lease takes effect. In other
words, earnest money can also be taken in respect of lease at the execution of the contract
of lease and this may be treated as an advance payment of rental. 22
11.3.1 Execution of an Ijarah Contract
Depending upon the nature of the asset, an Ijarah contract can be executed before or after
the possession of the asset by the lessor for its instant or future enforcement/commencement.
If the asset to be leased is existing, like an existing liveable house, a lease contract can be
17 Al-Kasani, 1993, p. 491.
18 Al-Kasani, 1993, pp. 469, 470.
19 Al-Kasani, 1993, p. 500; see also Zuhayli, 2003, p. 397.
20 Al-Kasani, 1993, p. 505.
21 Al-Kasani, 1993, p. 469; accordingly, contemporary jurists are unanimous that rental becomes due only after the asset comes into
the possession of the lessee in useable form and there is nothing to inhibit him from its normal use (AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard
on Ijarah, clause 5/2/2, p. 143).
22 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clauses 2/1, 2/2, 2/3, 5/2/2, pp. 139, 153.


----- p.283 (pdf 311) -----


Ijarah – Leasing 283
executed either for instant or future enforcement, because the usufruct of the house is clear
to the parties who can stipulate the rental, keeping in mind the benefit. Future enforcement
in Ijarah, as against Bai‘, is allowed also for the reason that ownership remains with the
lessor, who is responsible for the risk of damage to the asset. Similarly, in Ijarah Mosufah
bil Zimmah, wherein the nature or quality of the asset is specified and destruction of or
damage to a particular unit of the asset does not terminate the contract, a contract can be
executed either for instant or future enforcement.
However, if a particular asset is specified for Ijarah, a lease contract cannot be executed
before existence or getting ownership of the asset or its usufruct (in the case of sub-lease).
If the asset is destroyed in such leases, the contract will terminate. If the lessor does not
own the asset, he can enter into a promise to lease from the prospective lessee. Advance
rent can also be taken from the prospective lessee, but this will not be considered accrued
rent and will be adjusted against the rental becoming due from time to time. Islamic banks’
leases normally belong to this category. As per the requirement of the promise, the lessor
can purchase the asset from the market or, in special cases, from the promisee, in which
case it will be a case of “sale and lease-back” and the sale/purchase contract should precede
the lease contract. The Ijarah contract should not be stipulated as a condition of the lease
contract.23
11.3.2 Determination of Rent
The determination of rental on the basis of aggregate cost incurred in the purchase, con-
struction or installation of the asset by the lessor is not against the rules of Shar ¯ı´ah, if
both parties agree to it, provided that all other conditions of valid lease prescribed by the
Shar¯ı´ah are fully adhered to. Therefore, subject to mutual agreement of the parties to the
lease contract, rental can be determined on the basis of aggregate cost incurred by the lessor
for purchase/acquisition of the assets being leased. After the agreement is finalized, the
lessor cannot increase the rent unilaterally and any agreement to affect the contrary would
be void. If rental is once determined, there can be different rates for different phases based
on any agreed benchmark during the lease period. Further, parties to the Ijarah contract can
mutually agree during the lease period to review the lease period or rental or both.
Accordingly, in leases of long duration, it can be agreed upon that the rent shall be
increased after a specified period, like a year or so. Contemporary scholars have also
allowed in long-term leases tying up the rent with a variable and well-defined reference
rate or benchmark or enhancing the rent periodically according to a mutually stipulated
proportion (e.g. 5 % every year) if the other requirements of Shar ¯ı´ah for a valid lease are
properly fulfilled. Using any well-defined benchmark or price index for long-term lease is
recommended to determine rentals for subsequent periods, as it helps in avoiding any dispute
or injustice with any of the parties due to possible fluctuations in the market rate structure
and binding nature of the lease contract. 24 It can also be provided in the lease agreement that
in the case of an increase in property tax or other government taxes, the rental will increase
to the extent of the amount of the tax. Rent can also be tied up with the rate of inflation, i.e.
if the inflation rate is 5 %, the rental will increase by 5 %.
23 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clauses 3/1, 3/2, pp. 140, 141, 152.
24 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 5/2/3, pp. 143, 154.


----- p.284 (pdf 312) -----


284 Understanding Islamic Finance
The question arises whether any interest rate benchmark like LIBOR (London Inter-bank
Offer rate) can be agreed as the benchmark for rental. According to a minority of the scholars,
with such benchmarks the transaction becomes similar to an interest-based transaction and,
therefore, is not permissible. This is not the correct viewpoint, because as long as the basic
requirements of Shar ¯ı´ah are being complied with, any benchmark can be used to price sale
or lease transactions. Benchmarking the transaction’s pricing to an interest-based rate does
not render it Haram.
The rate of inflation, any price index, growth rate or any well-defined return rate in real
sectors of an economy can be used for benchmarking. However, the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars do not
like any interest-related benchmark for determining periodical increases in the rental due to
the resemblance to interest. In principle, however, they allow it because the basic difference
between valid lease and interest-based financing is that in leasing, the lessor assumes full
risk in respect of the corpus of the leased assets. If the leased asset loses its usufruct without
any misuse or negligence on the part of the lessee, the lessor cannot claim the rent and
he will have to bear the loss of destruction. In the case of interest-based lease financing,
however, the lessee is made to bear all ownership-related expenses and responsibility. So
far as this basic difference (of assuming the risk) between lease and interest-based financing
is maintained, any transaction will not be categorized as an interest-bearing transaction.
It seems, therefore, that the use of any rate merely as a benchmark (floating rental) does
not render the contract invalid, provided the amount of the rental of the first period of the
Ijarah contract is specified. It is, however, desirable to use benchmarks other than interest
benchmarks, so that an Islamic transaction is totally distinguished from an un-Islamic one,
having no resemblance to interest whatsoever. 25
In order to avoid Gharar and/or Jahala for both parties, the scholars suggest that the
relation between the rent and the reference rate should be subjected to a ceiling or limit. 26
For example, it can be provided that rent in no case will increase or decrease by more
than 5 %.
11.3.3 Sub-lease by the Lessee
In principle, sub-lease is permissible subject to the consent of the lessor. This can be provided
in the lease agreement. All the recognized schools of Islamic jurisprudence are unanimous
on the permissibility of sub-lease if the rent agreed to be taken from the sub-lease is equal to
or less than the rent payable to the owner/original lessor. However, the opinions are different
if the rent charged from the sub-lessee is higher than the rent payable to the owner. Shafi‘is
allow it and hold that the sub-lessor may enjoy the surplus received from the sub-lessee. This
is the preferred view in the Hanbali school as well. On the other hand, Imam Abu Hanifa is
of the view that the sub-lessor cannot keep the surplus received from the sub-lessee and he
will have to give that surplus to charity. However, if the sub-lessor has developed the leased
property by adding something to it or has rented it in a currency different from the currency
in which he himself pays rent to the owner/the original lessor, he can demand a higher rent
from his sub-lessee and can enjoy the surplus.
According to the contemporary Shar ¯ı´ah scholars, the viewpoint of the Shafi‘i and Hanbali
schools is preferable, meaning that leased assets can be sub-leased regardless of the amount
25 Usmani, 2000a, pp. 168–171; AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 154.
26 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clauses 5/2/3, 5/2/5, pp. 143, 154.


----- p.285 (pdf 313) -----


Ijarah – Leasing 285
of rental.27 However, if a lessee sub-leases the property to a number of sub-lessees or invites
others to participate in his business by making them share the rentals received from his
sub-lessees without transferring the part of ownership, or for making them participate in
rentals he charges a specified amount from them, this is not acceptable in Shar ¯ı´ah, because
he does not transfer the part of ownership and enters into contracts to simply share the rentals
received by his sub-lessees. In this way, he simply assigns his right to receive rent against
some payment. This right cannot be traded in because it amounts to selling a receivable at
a discount, which amounts to Riba.
11.3.4 Security/Guarantee in Ijarah
As Ijarah creates a debt in the form of payable rental, the lessor can demand security and/or
a guarantee from the lessee. Taking security is also permissible for the reason that the leased
asset is handed over to the lessee as a trustee and he is required to protect the asset in his
fiduciary capacity. He can be held liable for any damage to the asset if it is proved that
damage has occurred due to any negligence on his part. In cases of such loss or defaults in
payment of rental by the lessee, the lessor can recover the actual loss, excluding the cost of
funds or opportunity cost in modern terminology, from the security. Any amount taken as
income over and above the due rent would be Riba. 28
11.3.5 Liabilities of the Parties
There is no liability on a lessee or employee except when it is established that he has
transgressed or wilfully wasted or damaged the property. 29 In such cases he is liable to
compensate the lessor for harm to the leased asset caused by misuse or negligence, or to
replace the property.
All liabilities emerging from the ownership shall be borne by the lessor, but the liabilities
relating to the use of the property shall be borne by the lessee. For example, in the case of
lease of a house, the taxes relating to the property shall be the responsibility of the owner of
the house, while the water tax, electricity bills and all expenses referable to use of the house
shall be borne by the lessee. 30 Contemporary Shar ¯ı´ah experts and Islamic banks’ Shar ¯ı´ah
boards link the responsibility of the owner (lessor) to bear expenses on the asset on which
the continued performance and usufruct of the asset is customarily understood with the free
agreement of the parties, i.e. in the case of agreement to the contrary, expenses could be
borne by the lessee. 31
The leased property shall remain in the risk of the lessor throughout the lease period in the
sense that any harm or loss caused by factors beyond the control of the lessee shall be borne
by the lessor. However, as discussed earlier, the lessee is liable to compensate the lessor for
harm to the leased asset caused by any misuse or negligence on his part. A property jointly
owned by two or more people can be leased out, in which case they shall be responsible for
its risk and the rental shall be distributed between them according to the proportion of their
respective shares in the property.
27 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 3/3, p. 140.
28 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clauses 5/2/5, 6/1–6/3, 7/1/4, pp. 142–144, 153.
29 Ibn-Hazm, 1988, 8, p. 201; Zuhayli, 2003, pp. 421–424.
30 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 5/1/7.
31 Institute of Islamic Banking and Insurance (IIBI), 2000, p. 23.


----- p.286 (pdf 314) -----


286 Understanding Islamic Finance
11.3.6 Termination/Amendment of the Contract and Implications
Ijarah is basically a binding contract, meaning that once executed, it cannot be revoked
unilaterally. Unilateral and unconditional option to terminate a lease by any of the parties is
contrary to the principles of justice and equity and, therefore, un-Islamic. 32 However, both
parties can amend or terminate the contract with mutual consent. 33
If the leased asset is damaged to the extent that it is no more able to give usufruct, the
contract of Ijarah is terminated. 34 Similarly, in the case of an impediment to achieving the
normally expected objective of the contract, the lessee can terminate the contract. In this
situation, the parties may adjust the rental to avoid injustice to the lessee, keeping in mind
the partial damage to the asset and possibility of beneficial use. If an unidentified unit of
asset is leased (Ijarah Mosufah bil Zimmah), the contract will not terminate and the lessor
will be required to replace it with another asset of the agreed specifications. 35
If the lessee stops using the asset without the lessor’s consent, accrual of the rental will
continue.36
If the asset is sold to the lessee, the Ijarah contract is terminated due to the transfer of
ownership to him. If the asset is sold to any third party, the contract does not terminate and
the rights and obligations transfer to the purchaser of the asset. The lessee’s consent is not
necessary if the lessor wants to sell the leased asset to any third party. If the purchaser is
not informed about the lease contract, he can terminate the sale contract. If he knows of it
and consents to it, he takes the place of the previous owner. 37
The traditional jurists differed regarding the termination of lease due to death of any of
the parties, i.e. the lessor or the lessee. But contemporary jurists have come to the conclusion
that an Ijarah contract is not terminated with the death of either party. However, the heirs
of the lessee can terminate if they feel that the contract has become too onerous for their
resources to pay the rental. 38
The lessor is allowed to provide in the lease contract that he will have a right to terminate
the lease if the lessee contravenes any term of the lease agreement. In that case, the
lessee would be obliged to pay the due rent and not the rent of the remaining period. 39 In
conventional leases, it is generally provided in the agreement that in the case of termination
of the lease, even at the option of the lessor, the lessee would pay full or a part of the
rent of the remaining period. The basic reason for inserting such conditions is that the main
concept behind the agreement is to give an interest-bearing loan under the cover of lease.
This condition is obviously against the Shar ¯ı´ah and the principles of equity and justice.
The logical consequence of the termination of lease is that the lessor should take the
asset back. In this case, the lessee should be asked to pay the rent as due up to the date of
termination. If the termination has been effected due to misuse or negligence on the part
of the lessee, he can also be asked to compensate the lessor for the loss caused by such
misuse or negligence. But he cannot be asked to pay the rent of the remaining period. It can
32 Zuhayli, 2003, pp. 405, 411, 433, 434.
33 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 4/1/1, 7/2/1, pp. 141, 152.
34 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clauses 7/1/3, 7/2/4; Ibn-Hazm, 1988, 8, pp. 184–185.
35 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 7/1/5.
36 Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Majallah, Article 443; AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clauses 7/1/5, 7/1/6, 8/8.
37 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 7/1/2.
38 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 7/2/3, pp. 145, 156.
39 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 7/2/2.


----- p.287 (pdf 315) -----


Ijarah – Leasing 287
also be provided in the contract that in the case of a default in payment of rental by the
lessee, the lessor could terminate the lease.
If a lessee has paid rental for any stipulated period in advance and he is obliged to return
the asset because of any compelling circumstances ( force majeure ), the remainder of the
advance rental must be returned to the lessee, because the lease will be considered to have
been dissolved for a valid reason. The remainder, if any, will also have to be returned in the
case of mutual dissolution. If, however, the asset is not returned by the lessee, enabling the
bank to re-lease it, the remainder will not be returned. 40
11.3.7 Failure in Payment of Due Rent
Rental in respect of any lease contract when it becomes due takes the form of a debt payable
by the lessee. It will be subject to all rules prescribed for a debt. Therefore, a charge from
the lessee on the agreed rental would be Riba, prohibited by the Shar ¯ı´ah.41 Unscrupulous
lessees could exploit this aspect and cause loss to the lessor by wilful default. To provide
a deterrent, Shar ¯ı´ah scholars allow that a donation or any amount of penalty payable to
charity can be provided abinito in the lease agreement; the amount of donation can vary
according to the period of default and can be calculated on a percentage per annum basis.
Any amount charged over and above the agreed rental must not become a part of the income
of the lessor and has to be given to charity. 42 As this late payment penalty cannot become
part of the income of lessor banks, it is advisable that a suitable clause be incorporated in
the lease agreement to the effect that in cases of wilful default, the bank will take possession
of the leased asset or enforce the collateral to recover its dues.
11.4 MODERN USE OF IJARAH
Leasing in one form or another comprises a sizeable part of financial services in the world
today. In its origin, leasing is one of the normal real sector business activities like sale and
not a mode of financing. However, for certain reasons, and in particular due to some tax
concessions it carries, leasing is being used in many countries for the purpose of financing,
and the financial institutions lease many types of assets and equipment to their customers.
In Islamic finance also, leasing is an important instrument with a lot of potential in the
business of Islamic financial institutions, not only because of these benefits but also because
of the “Asset-based nature” of investments in Islamic finance. From the Islamic perspective,
leasing operations by banks and financial institutions are governed by the rules prescribed
in Fiqh for Ijarah transactions.
To study Ijarah as a mode of financing, we shall discuss the process of entering into
modern Ijarah, purchase of the asset to be leased, treatment of Takaful and other expenses,
miscellaneous rules relating to determination of rental, commencement and payment of
rental, some common mistakes, commonly raised objections and their answers, termination
of the contract and the possibility and modus operandi of transfer of ownership to the lessee.
Non-bank financial institutions or companies (NBFIs/NBFCs) in almost all countries of
the world, and banking institutions in countries like Germany, Japan, etc. are using leasing as
40 Institute of Islamic Banking and Insurance (IIBI), 2000, p. 19; AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clauses 7/2/1, 8/8.
41 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clauses 5/2/5, 6/3, pp. 143, 144, 154.
42 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 6/4, pp. 144, 155.


----- p.288 (pdf 316) -----


288 Understanding Islamic Finance
a business mode. The forms of leasing these institutions are using are “financial lease”, also
termed hire–purchase; “financing lease”, also referred to as “security lease”; and “operating
lease”. We briefly describe modern forms of leasing below.
11.4.1 Financial Lease or Hire–Purchase
In modern financial leases, the lease period is long enough (usually the entire useful life of
the leased asset) to enable the lessor to amortize the cost of the asset with a market return
on its capital. The banks pay the price of the asset to the supplier, either directly or through
the lessee. While fixing the rent, the banks calculate the total cost they have incurred for
purchase of those assets and add the stipulated interest they could have claimed on such an
amount during the lease period. The aggregate amount so calculated is divided by the total
months of the lease period, and the monthly rent is fixed on that basis. The lease commences
on the day on which the price is paid by the lessor, irrespective of whether the lessee has
made payment to the supplier and taken delivery of the asset or not. This means that the
lessee’s liability for the rent starts even before he takes delivery of the asset. The risk of
ownership is borne by the lessee, i.e. the client.
The lessor recovers the cost and interest thereon and has no further interest in the asset.
The lessee purchases the asset at a price specified in advance or at its market value at that
time. The lease is not cancellable before the expiry of the lease period without the consent
of both parties. However, the lessee is normally allowed to prepurchase the asset before the
lease termination. In such situations, the lessor normally charges an extra amount (say 5 % of
the remaining amount of the bank’s funds) as a fine/liquidated damages for discontinuation
of their income stream. The leased asset serves as security and, in the case of default on the
part of the lessee, the lessor can take possession of the equipment without a court order. It
also helps reduce the lessor’s tax liability due to the high depreciation allowances generally
allowed by tax laws in most countries. The lessor can also sell the equipment during the
lease period to the effect that the rental payments accrue to the new buyer. This enables the
lessor to get cash when he needs liquidity.
Normally in such contracts, compound interest is involved in the case of default or delay
in payment of the instalments. As such, the end result of financial lease may turn out to
be worse and more exploitative than the outright purchase of the asset by the lessee on
credit instalments. For example, in a conventional lease contract of five years, the lessee is
required to continue to make payments even if he no longer needs the asset, say after two
years. In the case of a credit purchase on the basis of interest, he could sell the asset in the
market to repay his liability. He cannot do this in financial lease and could even lose his
stake in the asset, even though he has paid a part of the price of the asset in addition to the
rental charges in normal operating lease.
11.4.2 Security or Financing Lease
A security lease in the conventional set-up is just a financing transaction and noth-
ing more than a disguised security agreement for the amount financed to the lessee. It
involves the effective transfer of all risks and rewards associated with the ownership to the
lessee.


----- p.289 (pdf 317) -----


Ijarah – Leasing 289
11.4.3 Operating Lease
In operating lease, the owner of the asset gives possession of the asset to the lessee, retaining
its ownership, to have its use in return for rental. The lessor takes back the equipment/asset
when the lease ends. This method is considered fully compatible with Shar ¯ı´ah provided
some other conditions are fulfilled. Operating lease is particularly suitable for high cost
assets that require large amounts of money in order to possess and have long production
times, for example, aircraft, ships, etc.
Operating lease is rarely used by banks. Non-bank financial institutions sometimes use
this mode of leasing in respect of specialized machinery. They maintain a number of assets to
respond to the needs of different customers. The assets remain the property of the institution
to re-lease them every time the lease period terminates. As such, NBFIs have to bear the
risk of obsolescence, recession or diminishing demand.
11.4.4 Appraisal of Conventional Leases from the Shar ¯ı´ah Angle
Important features of most modern leases are:
1. At expiry of the hiring contract, ownership of the leased article is transferred to the
lessee, either free of any additional charge or at a nominal/token price. Particularly in
hire–purchase, it is mutually agreed at the very beginning that the contract of Ijarah also
includes sale of the asset and the amounts received periodically from the lessee will
include both rental and the cost of the asset. In finance lease, the amount periodically
paid by the lessee is the rental; however, the parties may or may not agree in the lease
agreement that at the termination of the lease the lessee will get ownership of the asset.
We shall discuss this aspect in detail in the next section.
2. The lessor starts charging rental as soon as he gives funds to the supplier of the asset.
As such, he leases an asset before buying it and taking its possession and gets reward
without bearing its ownership risks. As per Shar ¯ı´ah principles, rent has to be charged
from the date when the lessee is in a position to take benefit from the leased assets, i.e.
after he has taken delivery of the asset, and not from the day funds are released to the
lessee or the price has been paid to the supplier.
3. The lessor shifts all the risks to the lessee, particularly when the residual value of the
asset is also fixed in advance in the lease contract. According to the Shar ¯ı´ah principles,
all expenses incurred to rectify defects which prevent the use of the equipment by the
lessee are the lessor’s responsibility, while the lessee is responsible for the day-to-day
maintenance and running expenses. This is the major difference between conventional
and Islamic leases.
4. In conventional operating leases also, all risks and expenses are the responsibility of the
lessee. But in Islamic operating leases, the lessor must bear the upkeep responsibilities
and bear all the risks and costs of ownership. Further, the operating lease is not for
the entire useful life of the leased asset, but rather for a specified time period and ends
at the end of the agreed period unless renewed by the mutual consent of both the lessor
and the lessee.
11.4.5 Combining Two Contracts
Ijarah and sale are two different types of contract with different governing rules, particularly
in view of the principle that while in sale contracts, ownership is transferred to the buyer


----- p.290 (pdf 318) -----


290 Understanding Islamic Finance
instantly even if it is a credit sale, in Ijarah, ownership remains with the lessor. Transfer of
the ownership in the leased property cannot be made by executing a sale contract that will
become effective on a future date. In most commercial leases, the lessee pays, in addition
to the rental, a sum which goes toward buying the leased property. If the lessee is given
credit for his payments by becoming, in ever-increasing degree, the owner of the property,
the proportion of his payments that goes to rent should also continually reduce and justice
would require that upon making full payment along with rental, the ownership title should
transfer to him. But the question is how can the lease agreement be structured to make it
Shar¯ı´ah-compliant and also justifiable for the lessee, who has paid the full cost of the asset
and the rental?
Contemporary Shar ¯ı´ah scholars recommend that a lease agreement should not contain
a precondition of sale or gift after the lease period. However, the lessor may enter into a
separate unilateral promise to sell the leased asset at termination of the lease. The principle,
according to them, is that a unilateral promise to enter into a contract at a future date is
allowed, whereby the promisor, say the bank, is bound to fulfil the promise, but the promisee
is not bound to enter into an actual purchase contract. This means that the lessee would
have an option to purchase, which he may or may not exercise. However, if he wants to
exercise his option to purchase, the promisor cannot refuse it because he is bound by his
promise. This is to avoid a bilateral promise by the two parties, which is prohibited in
Shar¯ı´ah because it becomes a contract. Similarly, scholars suggest that instead of sale, the
lessor signs a separate promise to gift the asset to the lessee at the end of the lease period.
This is because normally the bank, as lessor, recovers the whole cost incurred on the asset
and also a return thereon as its profit margin from the lessee. As such, it seems to be the
lessee’s right that he gets ownership of the asset, and the best way to transfer ownership is
to give him the asset as a gift. 43
There may be an objection that Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek also comprises two contracts
in one bargain and as such it is not Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant on the basis of the prohibition of
two bargains in one. This perception is set aside on the following grounds:
1. Mainly the transaction is one whereby the lessor leases the asset and fixes the rental in
such a way that during the lease period his cost and the rent are received. Both parties
agree on this nature of the transaction.
2. It consists of an Ijarah contract, which immediately goes into effect, and a unilateral
promise that may or may not become effective in a later stage or at the end of the lease
period. The second part is only a unilateral promise and is not binding on the promisee;
as such it is not a transaction until actually entered into by the parties.
3. This arrangement does not involve any injustice to any of the parties, Riba or any element
leading to dispute among the parties. It is rather justifiable in that the lessee, who has
paid the cost along with the rental, is able to get ownership title of the asset at the end
of the lease period.
From this perspective, a sale executed at the end of the lease period is not in contravention
of any basic principle of the Shar ¯ı´ah.
43 The OIC Fiqh Academy allowed this in its third session. Also see Institute of Islamic Banking and Insurance (IIBI), 2000, p. 23.


----- p.291 (pdf 319) -----


Ijarah – Leasing 291
11.4.6 Takaful/Insurance Expenses
It is a regulatory requirement in many countries of the world that the leasing entities should
insure the leased assets. Islamic banks should use Takaful that has been approved by the
Shar¯ı´ah scholars as an alternative to insurance and should avoid conventional insurance
due to the involvement of Riba and Gharar. However, a large number of Islamic banks are
using insurance due to the nonavailability of Takaful-based policies. Shar ¯ı´ah scholars have
allowed this only for the transitional period.
There is criticism by many scholars of a practice whereby the Islamic banks make the
lessee the actual payer of the Takaful contribution or premium by passing on the premium
costs as part of the lease instalments to be paid by the lessee. This criticism is based on the
understanding that the lessor has an insurable interest in the subject matter and he/it should
pay the insurance premium and not the lessee. It is correct that, as owner of the asset, the
bank should be the insurer and the beneficiary of the Takaful policy. Islamic banks normally
include the Takaful expenses in the acquisition cost of the asset for determining the rental.
Shar¯ı´ah scholars allow this on the grounds that rental in leases is subject to mutual consent
of the two parties and if the lessee agrees to the amount of rental, the contract is acceptable
from the Shar ¯ı´ah angle. As regards the insurable interest, it rightly belongs to the bank as
lessor. But if the transfer of ownership becomes impossible without any cause attributable
to the lessee, the lessee must be protected from the loss by paying to him the difference
between the rent received from him as per the lease agreement and the market rental of such
assets.44 Some Islamic banks are not abiding by this rule; it is against the spirit of Islamic
finance and the Shar ¯ı´ah advisors should look into the matter.
The issue of primary focus in this regard is determining the effects of loss or damage to
the asset. It is usually stipulated in the agreement that the lessee will be provided with a
copy of the policy and he will observe the conditions of the policy. Therefore, if the asset
is destroyed and there is lack of observance of the conditions of the Takaful policy that
has barred the lessor from recovery, the lessee is held liable. In the absence of any fault or
negligence on the part of the lessee, the lessor bears all responsibility for damage to or loss
of the leased asset. If, however, the claim paid by the Takaful company is less than the loss
incurred by the Islamic bank, the remainder of the loss cannot be charged to the lessee and
the bank itself should bear the loss.
11.5 ISLAMIC BANKS’ IJARAH MUNTAHIA-BI-TAMLEEK
The above section implies that the Shar ¯ı´ah objections to modern leases relate mainly to
(i) the procedure of ownership transfer to the lessee; (ii) accrual of the rentals and (iii) the
responsibilities of the lessor in respect of ownership-related risks and expenses. If these
aspects are taken care of by Islamic banks, they can use leasing as a mode of finance. For this
purpose, they have adopted the modus operandi of Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek, according
to which the transaction basically remains one of Ijarah and the ownership transfer is kept
separate from the main Ijarah contract. This is closer to the conventional finance lease with
the following differences:
44 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 8/8, pp. 147, 157.


----- p.292 (pdf 320) -----


292 Understanding Islamic Finance
1. In a finance lease, the rental starts accruing as soon as the payment for purchase of the
asset being leased is made by the lessor; in Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek, rental starts at
the time when the asset is supplied to the lessee in useable form.
2. In a finance lease, the payment of the cost price of the asset is made either to the supplier
or to the lessee so that he may pay the supplier and get the asset on lease. In Islamic
lease also, the price of the asset can be paid either to the supplier or to the lessee, but
if it is paid to the lessee, there must be an agency agreement in addition to the lease
agreement. The agency agreement will precede the lease agreement and all elements of
Wakalah should be applicable to it. If the asset is destroyed before its delivery to the
lessee in useable form, the loss will be that of the principal and not of the agent.
3. In Islamic lease, the risk of the asset will be that of the bank as long as the client serves
as its agent for purchase of the asset, while in a finance lease, all risks are borne by the
lessee.
As a hire–purchase contract includes both lease and sale at the very beginning, it is not
suitable for Islamic banks. For Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek, Islamic banks normally purchase
the asset in response to specific requests from customers to get the asset on a lease that ends
with transfer of ownership after the lease term through a separate and a formal sale or gift
contract. According to the AAOIFI Standard on Ijarah, transfer of ownership in the leased
property cannot be made by a sale contract (along with the Ijarah) to be made effective on
a future date. Ownership can be transferred using one of the following means:
1. By means of a promise to sell for a token or other consideration or by accelerating the
payment of the remaining amount or by paying the market value of the leased property.
2. By promise to give it as a gift (for no consideration) at the end of the lease period.
3. By promise to gift contingent on a particular event, for example, upon the payment of
the remaining instalments.
The transfer of ownership in all the above forms should be independent of the Ijarah
contract and not an integral part of the transaction as a whole. The promise should be
unilateral and binding on the promisor and the other party must have the option not to
proceed. In cases 1 and 2 above, a new contract should be drawn up because ownership
will not transfer merely by virtue of the earlier promise. In respect of 3, where an Ijarah
transaction has separate documentation giving the asset as gift contingent upon the condition
that the remaining instalments are paid, the ownership will be transferred to the lessee if the
condition is fulfilled without any other document being signed. 45
The ownership can also be transferred prior to the end of the lease period at a price stipu-
lated in advance or at the market price or through the contract of Diminishing Musharakah,
in which case the financier’s part of ownership is gradually transferred to the lessee upon
payment of rental according to an agreed schedule and the rental will decrease accordingly.
Some Islamic banks take an undertaking or a unilateral promise from the lessee that at the
end of the lease or in the case of premature termination at his discretion and mutual consent,
he will pay the market or a prestipulated price. A price schedule is agreed in advance that
implicitly includes the bank’s possible loss in the case of termination of lease before the
agreed period.
45 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clauses 8/1–8/4, 8/6, 8/7, pp. 146, 156.


----- p.293 (pdf 321) -----


Ijarah – Leasing 293
If the case is one of “sale and lease-back” – the bank purchases an asset from the client
and then leases the same to him – on the basis of Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek, there should
be a reasonable period between the purchase and lease contract and the transfer of ownership
back to the customer, long enough that the leased property or its value might have changed.
The period of one year is normally suggested for this purpose. It is necessary to avoid a
contract of Bai‘ al ‘Inah. 46
11.5.1 Procedure for Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek
Islamic banks’ Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek, broadly speaking, comprises an arrangement in
which leasing is the real and major contract, which is subject to all the rules of an ordinary
Ijarah contract where the standard Shar ¯ı´ah principles of defining the asset to be leased, its
terms and essential prerequisites of contracts have to be observed. Islamic banks normally
adopt the following procedure to conduct Ijarah, remaining within the limits of the Shar ¯ı´ah:
1. The client conveys his requirement to the bank and enters into an MoU for stipulating
the overall structure of the deal. The bank takes an undertaking from the lessee along
with some earnest money (Hamish Jiddiyah) to ensure that the client is serious in his
dealing and will take the asset on lease when purchased by the bank. The amount of
earnest money is kept as trust, but if the bank gets permission from the client for its use,
it takes the form of a debt and becomes the liability of the bank. The AAOIFI Standard
recommends that it should be kept as an investment trust to be invested by the bank on
the basis of Mudarabah. As such, it should be kept as a PLS deposit in the name of the
client. With the consent of the client, this amount can also be treated as advance payment
of rental. 47
2. The bank can directly purchase the asset or appoint any agent for the purpose. If the asset
is to be imported, the bank can appoint the customer its agent who may open an L/C and
place an order with the foreign supplier on behalf of the bank. He will pay the relevant
duties, taxes, transportation and other charges to the port authorities for releasing the
asset. All such payments made by the importer will be reimbursed by the bank and will
constitute part of the total cost of the asset. According to the AAOIFI Standard, any third
party agent is preferable, but the client can also be appointed as agent. If the vendor of
the asset is also indicated by the client, the bank can get a performance bond from him
to the effect that the asset supplied will be acceptable to him. The bank, however, will
remain liable for ownership-related risks and expenses. 48
Unlike sale (through Murabaha), it is not necessary in lease that the bank should first
take possession of the asset and then deliver the same to the lessee. If the bank has
agreed to lease the asset to a client with effect from the date of delivery and the client
is appointed as agent to purchase that asset, the lease can be made operative on the
date when the lessee takes delivery as agent, without any additional procedure. While in
Murabaha to Purchase Orderer, simultaneous transfer by the bank and the agent is not
allowed, in leasing, the lease period may begin right from the time when the client takes
delivery as agent. This is because ownership of the asset remains with the lessor along
with risk and reward during the leasing period.
46 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clauses 3/4, 8/6, pp. 140, 146.
47 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 2/3.
48 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 3/7, pp. 140, 154.


----- p.294 (pdf 322) -----


294 Understanding Islamic Finance
3. Sometimes the bank and the client jointly purchase the asset and create a partnership by
ownership (Shirkatulmilk) and the bank leases out its share to the client on the principle of
Diminishing Musharakah. The rental to be received by the bank should be in proportion
to its share in the ownership. Hence, if clients periodically purchase any parts of the
bank’s share, the rental should go on decreasing. 49
4. When the asset is purchased by the bank and taken into its possession or that of the client
serving as agent, the formal lease agreement is executed. Rental starts accruing from this
point of time onward if all installation work is complete and the asset is in useable form.
If the lessee delays in using the asset due to any problem attributable to him, he will have
to pay the rental.
5. If the client defaults in paying the rental, the bank can ask for acceleration of payment,
provided it is agreed in the lease agreement. This would be the case of early termination
of the lease; the bank would take the asset back or the lessee would purchase the asset as
per the terms of the agreement. In the case of foreclosure of security, only the due rent
can be deducted and not the rent for the remaining period. 50
The other subsequent contract is a contract for gift or sale, independent of the earlier
lease contract. For transferring ownership title, Islamic banks use any of the three methods
described above, i.e. promise/undertaking to sell (by the bank) or purchase (by the client)
and executing a formal sale agreement at the time of the sale; promise to gift; or promise to
a contingent gift.
The lessee pays rental that also includes the cost of the asset incurred by the lessor on
acquiring the asset. Therefore, a part of the rental effectively goes towards buying the leased
property, although, legally, the whole rent represents rental for use of the asset. As the parties
can agree on any amount of rental with mutual consent, and the arrangement is equally
beneficial for both the parties, Shar ¯ı´ah scholars have accepted this as Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant.
As the rental implicitly includes the cost of the asset, the AAOIFI Standard directs that if
transfer of property to the lessee is not possible for any reason, like destruction or theft of the
asset, or if continuity of the lease becomes impossible as per the lease contract without any
cause being attributable to the lessee, the rental should be adjusted based on the prevailing
market value – the difference between the prevailing rate of rental and the rental specified in
the contract must be refunded to the lessee if the latter rental is higher than the former. This
is to save the lessee from loss having agreed to pay a higher rental compared to the market
rental of a similar asset in consideration of the lessor’s promise to pass the ownership title to
him upon expiry of the lease term. 51 It also implies that if the bank has taken Takaful cover
of the asset, which normally is the case, the amount received from the Takaful company,
over and above the bank’s cost and expenses, should be given to the client.
There might be some problems in the leasing procedure of IFIs that are working without
intensive surveillance by Shar ¯ı´ah supervisory boards or Shar ¯ı´ah scholars, and this practice
will have to be discontinued if Shar ¯ı´ah compliance is the objective. The conventional
hire–purchase structure cannot be dubbed Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant merely by renaming it Ijarah
Muntahia-bi-Tamleek or Ijarah-wal-Iqtina‘. But a large number of institutions are using the
mode of Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek and are observing the Shar ¯ı´ah principles under the
49 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 3/6, p.140.
50 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clauses 6/5, 7/2/1, 7/2/2, pp. 144, 154.
51 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Ijarah, clause 8/8, pp. 147, 157.


----- p.295 (pdf 323) -----


Ijarah – Leasing 295
guidance of the Shar¯ı´ah scholars. As long as the Shar¯ı´ah-compliant procedure recommended
by the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars is adopted in letter and spirit, IFIs should not be unnecessarily
criticized.52
Sale and Lease-back Arrangement
In a sale and lease-back arrangement, a customer requires finance on the basis of an
asset already in his ownership. He sells the asset and then takes on rent for his use. This
arrangement is legally permissible but ideally should be avoided, and Islamic banks should
not adopt this as a major mode of business. However, if a client wants to get rid of Riba and
does not have any other alternative, he can be accommodated by Islamic banks. It, therefore,
should be used in exceptional cases and care should be taken to ensure that all parts of the
arrangement conform to the related Shar ¯ı´ah rules. In case of need, it can be used both for
financing of a new asset (machinery, equipment, etc.) and for conversion from conventional
to Islamic financing. The sale agreement must be executed before entering into the lease
agreement and in order to avoid Bai‘ al ‘Inah, such a leased asset can be sold back to the
client only after a reasonable period, long enough that the leased property or its value might
have changed.
Destruction/Theft of the Asset
If the leased asset is totally destroyed, the Ijarah contract concluded on an identified asset
is terminated. The leased asset is held by the lessee in a fiduciary capacity on behalf of
the lessor; he will be held liable for any damage or destruction of the leased asset due to
his misconduct or negligence. In the case of partial destruction in a manner that impairs
the benefits expected from the asset, the lessee can terminate the Ijarah contract. The lessee
and the lessor may also agree to amend the rental in the case of partial destruction of the
leased property. The lessor is not entitled to rent for the period during which the lessee is
not able to benefit from the asset, particularly if the fault occurred without any negligence
on his part.
11.5.2 Issues Concerning Modern Use of Ijarah
With respect to the modus operandi of modern leasing business, Islamic banks face five sets
of issues and problems.
1. One problem in Ijarah relates to burdens of the asset on the lessee or the lessor. For
example, the Shar ¯ı´ah provides that the duty of repairing the goods, other than normal
maintenance, falls solely on the lessor, since the repairs benefit him as the owner. A
clause in the contract purporting to shift ownership-related costs, other than the normal
operating expenses, to the lessee is invalid, because it unjustly enriches the lessor.
2. Another problem arises due to Islamic banks’ lack of knowledge of the Ijarah principles.
If a specified unit of asset is to be leased, the Ijarah agreement should be executed only
after the asset is in the possession of the lessor (or that of the lessee in capacity of agent
of the lessor). If the agreement is signed at the time of disbursement of the money to the
52 See, in this regard Vogel and Hayes, 1998, p. 145.


----- p.296 (pdf 324) -----


296 Understanding Islamic Finance
supplier and there is any delay in delivery of the asset to the lessee – the bank fails to
deliver the asset to the lessee on the date specified in the Ijarah agreement – no rental is
due for the period between the agreement date and the date of actual delivery. Therefore,
Islamic banks should enter into a “promise to lease” at the beginning and the actual Ijarah
contract should be executed at the time when the asset is made available by the supplier.
While determining the rental, they can keep in mind the whole period for which their
funds remain invested, i.e. the supply period and the lease period.
3. If any damage occurs to the asset during the supply stage, the lessee (client) serving as
agent is not responsible for it until any fault on his part is proved. The rental, if received
in advance, should be adjusted accordingly, unless it is agreed that the lease be extended
by an equivalent period after its original expiry date.
4. Another problem relates to the fact that the usufruct is extended to the future and may
therefore be risky and unstable, particularly if the usufruct is reduced materially in the
future. In this respect, Islamic law has the provision of cancellation of lease if any factors
or events cause the usufruct to be less than normally expected. For example, nearly all
schools of Islamic jurisprudence allow the reduction or abolition of rental of land if
the produce of leased farmland is damaged due to any natural calamity like drought,
floods, etc. According to Imam Muhammad, if the crop of leased land is destroyed due
to any natural calamity, Ijarah will become invalid and the lessee will be entitled to a
conventional wage. 53
5. A big problem emerges in the case of a default in payment of rental by the lessee, as the
penalty taken for late payment has to be given to charity.
Another important aspect is that the general perception that Ijarah gives a fixed return
to the bank is not correct. As Islamic banks have to purchase assets for leasing, they have
to pay all expenses incurred in the process of their purchase, import, etc. The bank can,
of course, include all these expenses in its costs and can take them into consideration
when fixing the rental, but as a matter of principle, it is liable to bear all these expenses
as owner of the asset. This also implies that discounts allowed by suppliers for the pur-
chase of leased assets would be the right of the Islamic bank, as it is the owner of the
leased asset during the lease period. Banks also have to pay the major expenses related
to ownership, like that of Takaful and other expenses necessary for the upkeep of the
asset. A claim received from a Takaful company might not be sufficient to cover the loss
or expense of repair. Hence, banks might not be able to get the targeted net return with
certainty.
The solution to the above problems does not lie in stratagems leading to objectionable
practices and integrity problems for the movement of Islamic finance. IFIs must take care
on two points. First, risk cannot be separated from ownership; as the leased asset remains
in their ownership, it must remain under their responsibility (Dham ¯an) and they must
take that responsibility. Second, lease and sale are contracts of two different natures; they
must be kept separate and independent of each other. If the above two aspects are taken
care of, they can adopt any procedure for leasing the assets, mitigating the risks and
transferring ownership to the lessee through any of the methods discussed in the preceding
paragraphs.
53 Al-Kasani, 1993, 4, p. 514.


----- p.297 (pdf 325) -----


Ijarah – Leasing 297
11.5.3 Assignment of the Leased Assets and Securitization of Leases
Shar¯ı´ah experts allow the lessor to sell the asset, in whole or any part of it, to any third
party along with its rights and obligations, in which case the sale will be valid and Ijarah
may continue. The sale of leased assets may particularly be required in respect of high cost
assets like aircraft, ships, industrial equipment, machinery, roads, bridges, etc. However, if
ownership is not transferred and the lease is simply assigned to the extent of rental only, the
assignment of lease for a monetary transaction is not allowed, because in that case, money
(rental) would be sold for money, which must be equal for equal, i.e. one cannot charge rent
more than one is paying.
The new party to whom the leased asset is sold will enjoy every right as lessor due to
the former party, while he will be responsible for every liability under the lease transaction.
This gives the Ijarah technique good potential for securitization and creation of a secondary
market for investors on the basis of Ijarah.
If the asset is sold to a larger number of investors, the purchase of a proportion of the asset
by each individual may be evidenced by certificates, which may be called “Ijarah Sukuk”
or leasing certificates. The certificates will represent the holder’s proportionate ownership
of physical assets tied to the Ijarah contract, and the holder will assume the rights and
obligations of the owner/lessor to that extent. Certificate holders are also required to maintain
the asset in such a manner that the lessee is able to derive as much usufruct from it as
possible.54 Therefore, Ijarah Sukuk are subject to risks related to real market risks arising
from potential changes in asset pricing and in maintenance and insurance/Takaful costs and
to the ability and desirability of the lessee to pay the rental instalments. In the case of
total destruction of the asset, Sukuk holders will suffer the loss to the extent of their pro
rata ownership. Hence, Ijarah Sukuk may generate a quasi-fixed return since there might be
default or some unexpected expenses that could not be envisaged in advance. As such, the
amount of rent given in the contractual relationship represented by Ijarah Sukuk represents
a maximum return subject to deduction on account of unexpected expenses.
11.5.4 Potential of Ijarah
Ijarah is the most important mode for financing operations of Islamic banks for meeting the
needs of the retail, corporate and public sectors, and it has huge, as yet unrealized, potential.
It is used directly for plant and machinery, automobiles, housing, consumer durables, etc.
and indirectly for Sukuk issues by the corporate and government sectors. Ijarah is conducive
to the formation of fixed assets and medium- and long-term investments in the economy.
The potential is by dint of a number of features of Ijarah as given below:
• Payment of Ijarah rental can be unrelated to the period of taking usufruct by the lessee,
i.e. it can be made before the beginning of the lease period, during the period or after
the period, as the parties may mutually decide. Accrual of rent, however, is based on the
possibility of usage of the asset by the lessee.
• Ijarah can be contracted on an existing asset or a building and even an asset that is yet
to be constructed, as long as it is fully described in the contract and is not for identified
54 Kahf, 1994, p. 207.


----- p.298 (pdf 326) -----


298 Understanding Islamic Finance
items, provided that the asset and the rent both are clearly known to the parties at the
time of the contract.
• The Ijarah rate can be fixed or floating, provided a clear formula is mutually agreed
with a floor and a cap. Rental has to be stipulated in clear terms for the first term of
lease, and for future renewable terms it could be constant, increasing or decreasing by
benchmarking.
• Holders of Ijarah Sukuk jointly acquire ownership in the asset, bear the price risks and
the ownership-related costs and share its rent by leasing it to any user(s).
The flexibility described above can be used to develop different contracts and Sukuk that
may suit different purposes of issuers and holders. Governments can use this concept as
an alternative tool to interest-based borrowing, provided they have durable useable assets.
Use of assets is necessary, while it does not matter whether these assets are commercially
viable or not. Funds mobilized by issuance of Ijarah Sukuk may be used to purchase assets
for leasing and the rentals received from the users distributed among the Sukuk holders.
Ijarah Sukuk can be traded in the secondary market on market price; the purchasers replace
the sellers in the pro rata ownership of the relevant assets and all rights and obligations of
the original subscribers pass on to them. Hence, they may help in solving the problems of
liquidity management faced by the Islamic banks and financial institutions.
Hence, Ijarah has great potential for financing public sector projects without the involve-
ment of interest. Ijarah Sukuk/certificates can be issued to raise funds from the primary
financial market for projects to be started afresh, or they can be issued against already
existing projects. They can also be sold in the secondary market at a price to be determined
by the market.
Suppose a government intends to build an airport but is short of funds. It may sign a
contract with a contractor to build the airport, but at the same time, it may undertake to
lease the airport and sell it to the public by issuance of Ijarah Sukuk. The value of the lease
(equal to or greater than the cost of construction) will be divided over a large number of
Ijarah Sukuk/certificates of different denominations and maturities. In other words, different
investors may participate in the lease contract for different periods. The government will
pay the contractor from the proceeds of the Sukuk. The government is not obliged to pay
investors anything different from the actual income from the facility.
11.6 SUMMARY OF GUIDELINES FOR ISLAMIC BANKERS ON
IJARAH
1. According to Islamic principles of finance, there is no difference between operating and
finance leases; if all of the four essential elements relating to contracting parties, subject
matter, consideration and the period in Ijarah are taken care of, Ijarah can be used as the
mode of modern business by the financial institutions in the form of Ijarah Muntahia-bi-
Tamleek. The deciding factor in this regard is the risk relating to ownership that must
remain with the lessor and sale should be separate from the lease.
2. The lease of an identified asset cannot commence before the bank takes the possession
of the asset to be leased. If the time of possession of the asset to be leased is unknown,
the whole arrangement will be provisional.
3. Any arrangement of two contracts into one contract is not permissible in Shar¯ı´ah. Therefore,
IFIs cannot have the agreement of hire and purchase built into a single agreement.


----- p.299 (pdf 327) -----


Ijarah – Leasing 299
4. When the period of lease comes to an end, the bank can transfer the ownership to the
client or dispose of it in the open market. If the bank transfers the ownership to the lessee,
the proper sale agreement or gift deed should be executed. The promise to transfer the
ownership is binding on the promisor only; the other party must have the option not to
proceed. The AAOIFI Standard provides for promise by the lessor, while many Islamic
banks, as in the case of Pakistan and other jurisdictions, take undertaking from the lessee
and deem it binding on him. Abiding by the AAOIFI’s Standard in this regard seems to
be justifiable and nearer to the spirit of the Shar ¯ı´ah.
5. The lessor bears expenses relating to the corpus of the asset, i.e. Takaful, accidental
repairs, etc., while operating expenses related to running the asset have to be borne by the
lessee. Takaful and other costs incurred by the bank can be recovered in the lease rental,
subject to transparency and mutual understanding. If the customer pays the Takaful cost
as agent of the bank, it will be reimbursed to the client by the bank.
6. A bank can jointly acquire an asset with a customer who wishes to get the asset on lease; the
bank can then lease its share of the asset as per the undertaking of the customer. The rental
to be received by the bank should be in proportion to its share in the ownership of the asset.
Box 11.1: Risk Mitigation in the Case of Ijarah
Nature of risk Mitigating tool
1. The bank has purchased the asset
as per the undertaking by the
customer, but the latter refuses to
take the asset on lease.
A binding promise to lease should be
obtained from the customer at the time of
booking/purchase of the asset by the bank.
Hamish Jiddiyah should also be taken from
the client. The bank can sell the asset in the
open market and the actual loss can be
recovered from the Hamish Jiddiyah.
2. The customer may default in
payment of the due rental. The
bank might not be able to recover
even its investment; the asset is
taken back, but it does not cover
the loss.
An undertaking should be obtained from the
customer to pay a certain amount to charity
in the case of late payment of rental. This
amount will go to the Charity Account. Any
actual loss can be recovered from Hamish
Jiddiyah. Securities/collateral can also be
realized.
3. Asset risk of major
maintenance/destruction.
This risk can be managed through a Takaful
facility.
4. Early termination of lease
agreement.
Keeping in mind the market value, the bank
can also take the asset back and sell in the
market to redeem its investment. In more
risky cases, an undertaking to purchase the
asset at a pre-agreed price schedule can be
obtained from the customer.


----- p.300 (pdf 328) -----


300 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 11.1: (Continued)
Nature of risk Mitigating tool
5. The lessee may use the asset
carelessly, requiring the bank
to bear major maintenance
expenditure.
A trust receipt should be obtained from the
customer to bind him to use the asset as a
trustee. It may be mentioned in the trust
receipt that loss due to negligence of the
customer shall be borne by the customer
himself.
6. Rate of return risk due to inflation. This risk can be covered through a
benchmarked floating rental rate, which is
permissible subject to a floor and a cap.
7. Sale of asset at maturity – the
customer may not buy.
Only those assets should be leased that have
sufficient resale value that the bank could
sell them in the market. Alternatively, a
separate promise to purchase at the end of
the lease term can be obtained from the
customer.
Box 11.2: Auto Ijarah Compared with Conventional Leasing Products
Conventional auto lease products Islamic Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek
Conventional financing leases contain
hire–purchase arrangements, which
are not permissible by Shar ¯ı´ah.
The Ijarah contract does not contain any
condition that makes the contract void
under Shar¯ı´ah. The lease remains subject
to all Ijarah rules; sale is not a part of it.
In conventional leasing schemes, the
customer is responsible for all kinds
of loss or damage to the vehicle,
irrespective of circumstances being
out of his control.
All risks pertaining to ownership are borne
by the Islamic bank. The customer only
bears usage-related expenses.
Insurance is independent of the lease
contract. The insurance expense of the
asset is borne directly by the lessee.
Takaful should be at the expense of the
lessor. The lessor, however, may increase,
with the consent of the lessee, the lease
rent to recover the Takaful cost.
If the insurance company does not
compensate the entire outstanding
amount in the case of loss/damage, the
customer is liable to pay the balance.
The Islamic bank bears the risk of Takaful
claim settlements.


----- p.301 (pdf 329) -----


Ijarah – Leasing 301
If the leased vehicle is stolen or
completely destroyed, the conventional
leasing company would continue
charging the lease rent until the
settlement of the insurance claim.
Under the Islamic system, rent is
consideration for usage of the leased
asset, and if the asset has been stolen or
destroyed, the concept of rental becomes
void. As such, an Islamic bank cannot
charge the rental.
In some conventional leases, the lessor
is given an unrestricted power to
terminate the lease unilaterally at his
sole discretion.
Ijarah is a binding contract and if there
is no contravention on the part of the
lessee, the lease cannot be terminated by
any one party. It can be provided in the
agreement that if the lessee contravenes
any terms of the agreement, the lessor
has a right to terminate the lease
contract unilaterally.
In most contemporary financial leases, an
extra amount is charged if rent is not paid
on time. This extra amount is taken by the
leasing institutions into their income.
This is prohibited due to being Riba.
Under Ijarah, the lessee may be asked to
undertake that if he fails to pay rent on
its due date, he will pay a certain
amount to a charity but the bank cannot
charge any further return.
Under conventional leasing contracts, the
vehicle is automatically transferred
to the name of the customer
upon completion of the lease period.
In Ijarah, the customer is not obliged to
purchase the vehicle. He may purchase
the asset through a formal sale deed if
he considers it beneficial for him.
Upfront payment has to be made in the
form of downpayment, the first year’s
insurance premium and other insurance
expenses, first month’s rental, etc.
Islamic banks normally take only a
security deposit, which is refundable if
the lease is not finalized. The bank has
the authority to recover only actual
expenses not including the cost of funds.
Box 11.3: A Hypothetical Case Study on Ijarah
ABC Textile Mills (Pvt.) Ltd, one of the customers of Merit Islamic Bank, has
requested an Ijarah facility for the following assets. The client will deposit 10 % of
the value of the Ijarah asset as a security deposit/earnest money.
1. Company cars 20 Rs. 10 000 000 (L/C has been established with XYZ bank)
2. Trucks 20 Rs. 360 000 000
3. Dyeing plant Rs. 140 000 000 (already owned by the client)
4. Looms 50 Rs. 15 000 000 (operating for about 1 year)
The Islamic bank’s employee is required to decide:
Issue # 1
Which asset will the bank finance through a direct lease and which through sale and lease-
back? What factors will it consider before allowing sale and lease-back transactions?


----- p.302 (pdf 330) -----


302 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 11.3: (Continued)
Issue # 2
One year after leasing the looms for his factory, ABC reports to the bank that five
of the looms have broken down and have to be repaired. The bank asks the evaluator
from the Takaful company to calculate the cost of repair and damage. The evaluator
reports, after inspection, that the looms broke down due to poor maintenance on the
part of the client and will take a month to be repaired at a cost of Rs. 20 000 per
loom. How should the bank calculate future rentals and the rental for the time when
the looms are being repaired?
Issue # 3
ABC has already leased 20 cars from the bank for a tenure of five years and has
used them to varying degrees. Two years down the line, ABC requests the bank to
sell him ten vehicles at a price of Rs. 400 000 each. Should the bank accept his offer
and what consideration should determine the decision? Prepaid expenses, including
Takaful outstanding, are Rs. 20 000 per vehicle. The outstanding Ijarah investment is
Rs. 350 000 per vehicle.
Issue # 4
In the same year, one of the cars is destroyed in an accident without any negligence on
the part of the client. The remaining outstanding Ijarah investment is the same as given in
Issue # 3 above. The Takaful amount recovered by the bank is Rs. 450 000 and the client
deposited a security deposit of Rs. 50 000. What amount is the bank legally bound under
the Ijarah agreement to give to the client? In view of the satisfactory payment behaviour,
in what ways can the bank accommodate the client without burdening itself?
Answers to the above Issues:
Answer 1
Direct lease/Ijarah Sale and Lease-back
The assets that can be financed under direct
lease are trucks, because the bank has to
purchase the same from the market.
The assets that can be financed under a sale
and lease-back arrangement are the dyeing
plant, looms and company cars (already
owned by the client).
Documentation required Documentation required
• Agency agreement and letter of agency
• Undertaking to Ijarah
• Ijarah agreement
• Sale deed of cars and plant
• Undertaking to Ijarah
• Ijarah agreement
• Description of Ijarah assets
• Ijarah rental schedule
• Demand promissory note
• Promise to sell/purchase Ijarah assets.
— description of the Ijarah asset
— schedule of Ijarah rentals
— receipt of asset
— demand promissory note
For sale and lease-back, an IFI must consider
the need and willingness of the client to
avoid interest and work with an Islamic bank.
Further, it will add the condition that ABC
Textile will not ask for early retirement
before one year.
• Ijarah rental schedule
• Unilateral promise to sell/purchase Ijarah
asset
• Sale deed at the end.


----- p.303 (pdf 331) -----


Ijarah – Leasing 303
Answer 2
As per the inspection report, the asset was not handled with care and proper mainte-
nance was not made by the client. Therefore, the bank should ask the client to repair
the asset at his cost; the bank will not bear the loss. Apparently, the rental will continue
to become due and rescheduling of the Ijarah payment plan should not be needed.
However, the Shar ¯ı´ah advisor should be involved and may decide, on merit, whether
the client may be given any relaxation or not.
Answer 3
In the given scenario, the bank can accept the offer of the client for the purchase of
ten cars with the consideration that the price offered by the client covers the current
outstanding liabilities, i.e. 3.7 million, and through this offer the bank can earn a profit
of Rs. 300 000, i.e. Rs. 30 000 per car, even after returning the security deposit, with
the assumption that the security deposit is included in the offer price.
Answer 4
As per the Ijarah agreement, any loss that occurs to the asset without negligence of
the client will be borne by the bank. The client has the right to take back the security
deposit as the agreement has come to an end due to the destruction of the asset.
Therefore, he will be paid Rs. 50 000 of his security deposit. The bank has been paying
the Takaful premium as owner of the asset. As such, legally the bank is entitled to
receive the Takaful claim. However, the client has been paying rental more than the
mere rental of similar assets as prevalent in the market, due to the inclusion of the cost
by the bank in the normal rental, and he has paid all the instalments as per agreement.
As per clause 8/8 of the AAOIFI Standard on Ijarah, the bank should allow/give the
customer Rs. 130 000 that includes Rs. 50 000 of security deposit and the claim
recovered from the Takaful company after deducting the liabilities outstanding as per
# 3 above, making the amount Rs. 80 000.
Box 11.4: Accounting Treatment of Ijarah
1. Operating Ijarah
Assets acquired by the bank as lessor
• are recognized at historical cost;
• depreciate as per normal depreciation policy;
• are presented as investments in the Ijarah assets A/c.
Ijarah revenue/expense
• is allocated proportionately in financial periods over the lease term;
• is presented as Ijarah revenue.
Initial direct costs
• are allocated over the lease term or otherwise charged directly as an expense.


----- p.304 (pdf 332) -----


304 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 11.4: (Continued)
Repairs of leased assets
• a provision for repairs is established if repairs are material and differ in amount from
year to year;
• repairs undertaken by the lessee with the consent of the lessor are to be recognized
as expense.
2. Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek through gift
Assets acquired
• are recognized at historical cost;
• are presented as Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek, with assets measured at book value;
• depreciate as per normal depreciation policy;
• however, no residual value shall be subtracted since it is to be transferred to the
lessee through gift.
Ijarah revenue/expense
• is allocated proportionately in financial periods over the lease term;
• is presented as Ijarah revenue.
Initial direct costs
• material costs are allocated over the lease term or otherwise charged directly as an
expense.
Repairs of leased assets
• a provision for repairs is established if repairs are material and differ in amount from
year to year;
• repairs undertaken by the lessee with the consent of the lessor are to be recognized
as expense.
At the end of the financial period/lease term
• legal title passes, subject to settlement of Ijarah instalments.
Permanent impairment/sale of lease asset
• If the Ijarah instalments exceed the fair rental amount and impairment is not due to action
or omission of the lessee, the difference between the two amounts shall be recognized
as liability due and charged to the income statement.
3. Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek for token consideration or specified amount
Assets acquired
• are recognized at historical cost;
• are presented as Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek assets and measured at book value;
• residual value is subtracted in determining the depreciable cost. Depreciation is
charged as per normal depreciation policy.
Ijarah revenue/expense
• is allocated proportionately in financial periods over the lease term;


----- p.305 (pdf 333) -----


Ijarah – Leasing 305
• is presented as Ijarah revenue.
Initial direct costs
• material costs are allocated over the lease term or otherwise charged directly as an
expense.
Repairs of leased assets
• a provision for repairs is established if repairs are material and differ in amount from
year to year;
• repairs undertaken by the lessee with the consent of the lessor are to be recognized
as an expense.
At the end of the financial period/lease term
• legal title passes, subject to settlement of Ijarah instalments and on purchase of the
asset by the lessee;
• if the lessee is not obliged to purchase and decides not to do so, the asset shall be
presented as assets acquired for Ijarah and valued at the lower of the cash equivalent
value or the net book value. If the cash equivalent is less than the net book value,
the difference between the two shall be recognized as loss;
• if the lessee is obliged to purchase the asset due to his promise but decides not to
do so, and the cash equivalent value is lower than the net book value, the difference
between the two amounts shall be recognized as a receivable from the lessee.
Permanent impairment/sale of lease asset
• if the Ijarah instalments exceed the fair rental amount and impairment is not due to
action or omission of the lessee, the difference between the two amounts shall be
recognized as liability due and charged to the income statement.
4. Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek through sale prior to the end of the lease term
for a price equivalent to the remaining Ijarah instalments
Assets acquired
• are recognized at historical cost;
• are presented as Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek assets and measured at book value;
• depreciate as per normal depreciation policy.
Ijarah revenue/expense
• is allocated proportionately in financial periods over the lease term;
• is presented as Ijarah revenue.
Repairs of leased assets
• a provision for repairs is established if repairs are material and differ in amount from
year to year;
• repairs undertaken by the lessee with the consent of the lessor are to be recognized
as expense.
Permanent impairment/sale of lease asset
• as in the above case.


----- p.306 (pdf 334) -----




