
----- p.307 (pdf 335) -----


12
Participatory Modes: Shirkah and
its Variants
12.1 INTRODUCTION
Islamic modes are asset-based and entail real economic activity and undertaking responsi-
bility or liability. The modes that form the basis of Islamic finance belong to participatory
or profit/loss sharing (PLS) or risk-sharing techniques and as such are considered the most
desirable modes by the majority of jurists on Islamic finance. This does not imply that non-
participatory modes, as discussed in the previous few chapters, do not involve business risk;
taking risk and responsibility is rather a precondition for the legality of profit in any busi-
ness. Shirkah-based participatory modes of business, however, involve direct participation
in profits and losses by the parties.
Two contracts, namely Mudarabah and Musharakah, that lend themselves to the system
of profit/loss sharing are based on the concept of Shirkah. A partnership may be in the right
of ownership (Shirkatulmilk), wherein a profit motive may not necessarily exist, or it may
be contractual (Shirkatul‘aqd), in which the partners enter into a contract to conduct a joint
business with the objective of earning profit and agree to share the profit on a pre-agreed
ratio and bear the loss, if any, to the extent of the investment of each partner. Another
variant may be wherein one partner may provide the capital and the other may manage the
business (Mudarabah) for earning profit. These modes are the means of providing risk-based
capital and are jointly termed participatory modes of finance. In this chapter we shall discuss
variants of Shirkah, namely Musharakah, Mudarabah, modern corporations and Diminishing
Musharakah, as modes of business by Islamic financial institutions (IFIs).
Partnership-based business was widely practised in the pre-Islamic period. The holy
Prophet (pbuh) himself did business on the basis of partnership before his prophethood and
many of his Companions did it during his life and later. Islam approved the concept of
business partnership. 1 The practice was so commonly prevalent among the Arabs and other
Muslims that, perhaps under their influence, the Christians of the areas in Europe where
Muslims went also conducted it and introduced it far inside Europe. 2
In the early/conventional books of Fiqh, joint businesses are discussed mainly under the
caption of Shirkah, which is a set of broad principles that can accommodate many forms of
joint business. According to the majority of the classical jurists, Mudarabah is also a type
of Shirkah when used as a broad term. In Fiqh books, discussion on Mudarabah is available
both in the chapters on Shirkah and under the separate caption of Mudarabah.
1 Hassan, 1993, p.104.
2 See Postan and Rich, 1952, 2, pp. 173, 267.


----- p.308 (pdf 336) -----


308 Understanding Islamic Finance
Musharakah is a term used by the contemporary jurists both for broad and limited connota-
tions. In the limited sense, it is used for contractual partnership in which all partners provide
funds, not necessarily equally, and have the right to work for the joint venture. In the specific
sense, it is an amalgam of Musharakah and Mudarabah wherein a Mudarib, in addition to the
capital provided by the Rabbul-m¯al, employees his own capital as well. This arrangement is also
permissible according to the jurists.3
While in Musharakah all parties contribute to the joint business and work for it, in
Mudarabah, one party contributes funds and the other acts as entrepreneur and the profit is
shared in a predetermined, mutually agreed ratio. In Mudarabah, the financier bears the loss
while the entrepreneur loses his already expended labour.
In this chapter we shall discuss the traditional concept of Shirkah as discussed in books
of Fiqh followed by a discussion on the application of the system of profit and loss sharing
in the contemporary world.
The modern Shirkah takes the form of partnerships, joint stock companies and cooperative
societies and, in a sense, that of pools, cartels, trusts and syndicates, etc. In modern law,
all these forms are treated differently in accordance with the differences in their objec-
tives and the nature of combination. An important difference between the Islamic and the
modern partnership laws exists in the former’s religious character. To describe the rules of
partnership, we shall discuss the subject in the three main sets of Musharakah, Mudarabah
and Diminishing Musharakah, the last being the latest development of Islamic jurisprudence
based on the broad principles of Shirkah.
12.2 LEGALITY, FORMS AND DEFINITION OF PARTNERSHIP
The legality of Shirkah is proved by the texts of the Holy Qur’¯an and Sunnah and the consensus
of the Islamic jurists.4 In particular, the two forms of Shirkah al Inan (general partnership) and
Mudarabah, which we will be discussing in the following pages, enjoy acceptance by all jurists
without any difference of opinion. Jurists normally divide Shirkah into two broad categories of
Shirkatulmilk (partnership by ownership or in right of ownership) and Shirkatul‘aqd (partner-
ship by contract). With these two forms, traditional Shirkah is the main source of rules governing
the operations of Musharakah, Mudarabah and Diminishing Musharakah by Islamic financial
institutions in the present age.
Keeping in mind the discussion by classical jurists and the modern business environment,
Shirkah can be defined as a business where two or more people combine their capital or
labour or creditworthiness together, having similar rights and liabilities, to share the profits or
a yield or appreciation in value and to share the loss, if any, according to their proportionate
ownership. This implies that capital is not necessary in certain structures of Shirkah. “Profit”
in the context of this definition and according to Islamic law can be made through purchase,
sale, hire or wages and excludes income arising from the contracts of marriage, divorce,
subsistence payable to wives and children or in the case of penalties and fines. We define
various forms of Shirkah in the following section. 5
3 Usmani, 2000a, pp. 27–33, 53, 54.
4 Holy Qur’ ¯an, verses: 4: 12 and 38: 24; the holy Prophet is reported to have conveyed the message of Allah (SWT), who says: “So
long as the two partners remain honest to each other, I am the 3rd”. (Abu Daud and Sahih al Hakim).
5 For various forms of Shirkah, see Ibn Qudama, 1367 AH, 5, p. 1 and Usmani, 2000b, pp. 139–144.


----- p.309 (pdf 337) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 309
12.2.1 Partnership in Ownership (Shirkatulmilk)
The basic element of Shirkatulmilk is the mixing of ownership, either mandatorily or by
choice. Two or more people are joint owners of one thing. It is further subdivided into
two categories: optional and compulsive. Optional partnership by ownership is explained
in the words: “where two persons make a joint purchase of one specific article or where
it is presented to them as a gift, and they accept of it; or where it is left to them, jointly,
by bequest and they accept of it”. Basically, it is not for sharing of profit. The co-owners
may use the property jointly or individually. Compulsive partnership is where the capital
or goods of two people become united without their act and it is difficult or impossible to
distinguish between them, or where two people inherit one property.
In other forms of partnership, a partner is treated as an agent to the other partner’s share,
but in partnership by ownership, partners (co-owners) are not agents of each other; here, a
partner is a stranger and in the absence of the other partner, he has no right to use the absent
partner’s property, nor can he be responsible for any liability arising out of the latter’s share.
He cannot use even his own share if it is detrimental to the interest of the other partner’s
share. It is, however, lawful for one partner to sell his own share to the other partner, and
he may also sell his share to others, without his partner’s consent, except only in cases of
association or a mixture of property, for in both these instances, one partner cannot lawfully
sell the share of the other to a third person without his partner’s permission. If joint property
is used by one partner, the owner may demand rental for his part of the property from the
benefiting partner. The distribution of the revenue of Shirkatulmilk is always subject to the
proportion of ownership.
12.2.2 Partnership by Contract (Shirkatul‘aqd)
This is the main form of Shirkah, which is created by offer and acceptance and is applicable
in most of the cases of modern business where two or more persons are involved. The
AAOIFI Standard has defined it as an agreement between two or more persons to combine
their assets, labour or liabilities for the purpose of making profit. 6 It is created through a
contract – offer and acceptance is its basic element – partners are agents of each other and
one partner cannot sell his share without the other partners consent and cannot guarantee
capital or any profit of the other partners.
This form can be further divided into: Shirkatulamwal, where all the partners invest
some capital into a commercial enterprise that comes under the collective ownership of the
partners as per the ratio of their capital; Shirkatula‘mal, where the partners jointly undertake
to render some services to their customers and share the fee charged by them according
to the agreed ratio and each partner brings his own resources, if needed, for the business;
and Shirkatulwujooh, meaning partnership in creditworthiness where all partners avail credit
from the market using their credibility and sell the commodity to share the profit so earned
at an agreed ratio.
In Shirkah, the rights and liabilities of all the partners should be similar, although not
necessarily equal. The basic principle of Shirkah is that a man who shares in profits must also
bear the risks. This principle is based on the Prophet’s saying that earnings are concomitant
to risks.
6 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Shirkah (Musharakah), clause 2/1, p. 200.


----- p.310 (pdf 338) -----


310 Understanding Islamic Finance
Contractual partnership (Shirkatul‘aqd) is subdivided into several kinds depending upon
the subject matter of partnership: capital (or goods), labour or personal creditworthiness, as
discussed briefly in below.
Shirkah-al-Mufawadah, or Universal Partnership
According to the Hanafi jurists, Shirkah-al-Mufawadah is where two persons, being the
equal of each other in respect of property, privileges and religious persuasion, enter into a
contract of partnership. This form is very cumbersome to operate because it refers to sharing
everything on an equal basis. Therefore, it is factually nonexistent. It is, in fact, advocated
by Hanafi jurists only. Imam Shafi‘e, Imam Ahmed ibn Hanbal, Imam Malik and the Jafari
jurists do not support this form. 7
Shirkah al ‘Inan, or General Partnership
Shirkah al ‘Inan, involving collective capital of the partners, is where any two persons
become partners in any particular business or where they become partners in all matters of
commerce indifferently. It is contracted by each party, respectively, becoming the agent of the
other and not his surety. This form enjoys consensus among all Islamic jurists. It is the most
important form and seems to be nearer to the modern concept of a business partnership. We
shall be discussing in detail mainly the rules of this general form of contractual partnership.
Shirkatula‘mal
Shirkatula‘mal, or San ¯ai‘ (partnership in labour or crafts), signifies a situation where two
persons become partners by agreeing to work jointly, and to share their earnings, in partner-
ship. It is also known as Shirkah Taqabbul, or Shirka al Abd ¯an. Some classical examples
of such a partnership are the partnerships between medical practitioners, teachers, miners,
transport owners and farmers. 8
Shirkatul Wujooh, or Partnership in Creditworthiness
Shirkatul Wujooh is where two persons become partners by agreeing to purchase goods
jointly, upon their personal credit (without immediately paying the price) and to sell these
goods on their joint account. Partners undertake to fulfil their obligations according to the
percentages determined by the parties. They also agree on the ratio of liability for which each
partner is responsible while paying such debt. 9 According to Imam Shafi‘e, it is unlawful.
The Maliki jurists observe that such a form of partnership has an element of random chance
and is, therefore, invalid. They have, however, permitted it on the condition that the element
7 Jurists of the Shafi‘e school of thought have legalized only Shirkatul ‘Inan. (Usmani, 2000b, p.186, with reference from Mughni
al-Muhtaj of Ramly and Takmelah Sharah Muhazzab).
8 Al Mudawwanah al Kubra, Cairo, 1323 AH (Matba al Sadah), 12,p .5 1 .
9 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 3/2.


----- p.311 (pdf 339) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 311
of obligation is made clear before the contract is effected, for example, joint credit purchase
of a specific commodity and sale at a profit. 10
Hanafi and Hanbali jurists, however, agree upon the validity of such a form of partnership.
Loss in this form of Shirkah will have to be borne as per the liability taken at the beginning.
If such a contract is enforced without first stipulating the extent of liability of each partner,
they will be responsible for credit taken by each of them individually and the working
partner will be entitled to wages for his work and not to a share in profits.
Mudarabah
Mudarabah, or partnership in the profits of capital and labour, signifies a contract of part-
nership in which one party is entitled to profit on account of its M ¯al, while the other party
is entitled to profit on account of its labour.
Of the above-mentioned kinds, Shirkah al ‘Inan and Mudarabah are the most popular
kinds of partnership and enjoy Ijma‘a of the jurists. Shafi‘e, Jafari and Zahirites like Ibn
Hazm treat only these two forms of Shirkah as lawful modes of joint venture. For the Shafi‘e
and Jafari schools, Shirkah is a contract between two or more (persons) made with a view
to making all profits common between the two (or among all the partners); the object of
contract preferably being trade. Hanafi and Maliki jurists believe in a broader circle of joint
business practices.
Shirkahal ‘Inan is suitable for joint businesses, adaptable to any situation and practicable
in the present day’s advanced commercial practices. It refers to a joint enterprise formed for
conducting any business with the condition that all partners shall share the profit according
to a specified ratio, while the loss will be shared according to the ratio of contribution to
the capital of the joint business. Two or more partners that are considered agents (Wakil) of
other partners share the business on the basis of the following conditions:
1. Capital can be invested by the partners in any proportion.
2. Power of appropriation in the property and participation in the affairs of the Shirkah may
be different and disproportionate to the capital invested by the partners.
3. Profit may be divisible unequally and disproportionate to the capital invested, and may
be according to the agreement of the partners.
4. Loss is to be shared in proportion to the capital invested.
5. Each partner is an agent to the other partners.
6. No partner is responsible for indemnification of the acts of commission and omissions
on the part of other partners.
There are a number of views regarding the last-mentioned condition above. Regarding
rights and liabilities of partners, jurists contend that partners are allowed to sell partnership
capital/assets, perform trading business with it, give it as deposit or collateral with others
and hand it over to any person for business on a Mudarabah basis. 11 Further, jurists consider
that the partners can perform all other acts that are according to the custom or common
practice, subject to compliance with the main Shar ¯ı´ah principles. If any partner takes a loan
for the joint business, all partners will be (jointly) liable to pay. 12
10 Al Mudawwanah, 1323 AH, 12,p .5 .
11 Al-Kasani, 1993, 6, pp. 68, 69.
12 Al-Kasani, 1993, 6,p .7 2 .


----- p.312 (pdf 340) -----


312 Understanding Islamic Finance
A Musharakah (and also Mudarabah) contract may be for any specific project up to
its completion or in the form of a redeemable investment by a partner, 13 particularly the
financial institutions – also known as Diminishing Musharakah. If the Musharakah lasts as
long as a business operates without any midway termination, it is considered a continuous
Musharakah.
The above discussion implies that Shirkah in Islamic law refers to all forms of partnership,
also including Mudarabah. Some of the jurists observe that Mudarabah is a form of Shirkah,
while some others treat this as different from Shirkah. It seems that the difference is due to
variation in analysis of business conditions more than the differences in Shirkah principles.
The former view is held by some of the jurists of the Maliki and Hanbali schools, while the
latter by the Hanafi school. The Hanafi jurists argue that Mudarabah should not be treated as
a form of Shirkah, because in Shirkah, the contracting parties become partners and, therefore,
liable to losses soon after the business is started or the capital of the partners is combined,
while in Mudarabah, the working party does not become a partner and is not liable to any
losses unless and until profits arise. Before the creation of profits, the position of the working
party is that of an agent, although the contract of Mudarabah becomes effective.
12.3 BASIC RULES OF MUSHARAKAH
In this section we shall be discussing the rules relating mainly to a general partnership
conducted with joint capital of the partners (Shirkatulamwal-cum-Shirkah al ‘Inan). All
conditions necessary for any valid contract, e.g. free consent of the parties that must be
without deception, misrepresentation and duress, etc., should be fulfilled in the Shirkah
contract. Certain other conditions must also be fulfilled, and these are outlined in the
following paragraphs.
12.3.1 Conditions with Respect to Partners
The word “persons” as used in the definitions refers to both individuals and legal persons
or corporate bodies. As regards individuals, it is unanimously agreed that they should be
free and of sound mind. The study of relevant rules in Fiqh suggests that insolvency and
prison are disqualifications for making the contract of sale; as the contract of partnership
comprehends mutual agency, anybody who is handicapped in exercise of this right cannot
act as a partner in the true sense and a contract so made should be deemed to be ineffective.
On this ground, minors and the insane are incompetent to become partners. A minor can
enter into a partnership if allowed by his guardian. 14 Imam Shafi‘e extends the state of
incompetence to all those who, for any reason, lose their power of decision, like a man
who is intoxicated. This is, however, a temporary incompetence. A man who is put under
inhibition by a court either because of insolvency or due to any other reason is also not
competent to enter into a contract of partnership, because his partner could be prevented
from making use of the inhibited partner’s property. The Jafari scholars give five reasons
which inhibit one from making a contract of sale. These are minority, stupidity, insanity,
13 Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, 5,p .6 3 .
14 Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Majallah, Article 1335.


----- p.313 (pdf 341) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 313
fatal disease and insolvency. 15 This is also applicable to Shirkah. The other jurists do not
disagree with this.
However, there is some difference of opinion about indebtedness as a cause of incompe-
tence or inhibition. Some jurists are inclined to accept that inhibition will not be imposed
if there is any possibility of the recovery of debt. 16 According to Imam Abu Hanifa, an
indebted person cannot be inhibited because, in this way, he is restrained from improving
his economic condition. He can, however, be imprisoned if he fails to repay his debts. 17 But
the later Hanafi law, based on the views of Imam Abu Yusuf and Muhammad, provides for
inhibition of the debtor if the creditors so demand. 18 Indebtedness here indicates a state in
which the total liabilities of a debtor exceed his total assets and he is unable to pay off the
debts. In the case of a businessman, it is a state of near insolvency. Inhibition does not apply
in the case of businessmen in the present age who run their entire business on credit and
command sufficient resources to dispose of their liabilities.
Musharakah can be concluded with non-Muslims and also interest-based banks to carry
out operations acceptable in the Shar ¯ı´ah. In this respect, arrangement has to be made to
obtain all necessary assurances and guarantees that the rules and principles of Shar ¯ı´ah
will be observed during the operation of the partnership. 19 It excludes all those businesses
which are not lawful in Islam, i.e. trade in swine flesh or liquor, etc. and unlawful activities
like pornography and gambling. For example, if a syndicate of banks comprising Islamic
as well as conventional banks is financing any huge project or corporate firm, the Islamic
bank’s portfolio must comprise valid contracts like Ijarah to ensure its Shar ¯ı´ah compliance.
In this respect, a distinction has to be made between the goods and activities which are
absolutely prohibited for all and the goods and activities which are prohibited for Muslims
alone. Interest, for example, is prohibited for all in an Islamic state, while alcoholic drinks
and flesh of the swine, etc. are prohibited for Muslims alone. A non-Muslim citizen of an
Islamic state can be permitted to trade in the objects of the latter category but partnerships
in any such trade will be declared void if any of the parties is a Muslim.
12.3.2 Rules Relating to Musharakah Capital
According to the majority of jurists, capital invested by a partner should be in the form of
liquid assets, i.e. money or prevalent currency units, and its value should be known without
any ambiguity, particularly according to Maliki, Hanbali and Shafi‘e jurists. Hanafites,
however, consider that knowing the amount of capital at the time of contract is not necessary;
it can be agreed before the commencement of business. 20 It should not be a debt or a
nonexistent commodity. 21 Al-Sarakhsi, a great Hanafi jurist, points out that the forms of
capital change from place to place according to ‘Urf of the place. Al-Kasani says that if
the practice of the people is to invest the capital in the form of currency, the matter shall
be decided according to this and if the practice of the people is to invest the capital in the
form of goods, the matter shall be decided accordingly. However, contemporary jurists are
15 Hussain, 1964.
16 Ibn Qudama, 1367 AH, 2, p. 168.
17 Al-Marghinani, 3, p. 342.
18 Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Majallah, Article 959.
19 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clauses 3/1/1/2, 3/1/1/3, p. 201.
20 Al-Kasani, 1993, 6,p .6 3 .
21 Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, 5, p. 16; Al-Sarakhsi, n.d., 11, pp. 156, 159.


----- p.314 (pdf 342) -----


314 Understanding Islamic Finance
unanimous that the value of goods should be assessed in terms of monetary units. Debt
cannot become part of partnership capital until it is received.
In the case of limited companies, capital is given the form of equal units called shares,
and the intended partners can buy as many of these shares as possible disproportionately.
The objects which, according to Islamic law, cannot be sold or utilized cannot form the
basis of a partnership contract. Broadly, Shirkah rules require that the capital of the partners
should be merged and commingled. The implication of commingling is that individual
ownership is replaced by the collective ownership of the joint venture and any appreciation
in value of the Musharakah assets will reflect the right of all the partners with the ratio of
their capital; any partner cannot say that his part, a shop for example, that he contributed
to the business at the beginning, has appreciated more in the case of a rise in its price,
and hence only he is entitled to the enhancement. Commingling does not necessarily imply
an indistinguishable character that the amount of capital should be in the form of cash, or
identical goods or transfer of money or goods towards the partnership capital just at the time
of contract. The merger can be actual or constructive, the latter being made on the basis of
valuation on any agreed standard like market value. In the case of goods, the share of the
partners will be calculated in terms of their money value at the time of contract.
After analysing the views of jurists of all schools of thought regarding the nature of
capital, Shaikh Muhammad Taqi Usmani has concluded:
“We may, therefore, conclude that the share capital in a Musharakah can be contributed either in
cash or in the form of commodities. In the latter case, the market value of the commodities shall
determine the share of the partner in the capital”. 22
Other aspects relating to the nature of partnership capital in the modern age include the
following: a person can become a partner of a running business having fixed assets by
investing capital in cash/kind, merger of various partnership firms is also possible. 23
This implies that the capital of all the partners has to be quantified and specified. In the
case of running business, valuation should be made in such a way that cash/receivables
are taken at face value and the conversion rate in the case of different currencies should
be that of the day of execution of the Musharakah contract. In the case of fixed assets, an
agreed-upon value will be taken, while the average utilized amount should be considered as
Musharakah capital if financing is made on the basis of running Musharakah, as in the case
of deposit management by Islamic banks on the basis of Shirkah.
12.3.3 Mutual Relationship Among Partners and Musharakah Management
Rules
Shirkah business is managed by the will and equal right of all the partners. As indicated
earlier, parties to a contractual Musharakah are agents of one another. When a contract
of Musharakah is executed, the conditions of agency are automatically presumed to be
in existence in the contract. The actual possession of one partner over property of the
Musharakah business is in the constructive possession of the other partners. However, if a
partner purchases something for himself only, it is exclusively for him and not for the joint
business.
22 Usmani, 2000a, pp. 38–41.
23 This is according to Ahnaf, Malikis and Hanbali (Al-Kasani, 1993, 6:60; Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, 5:129; Usmani, 2000b,
pp. 257–261).


----- p.315 (pdf 343) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 315
All partners in a Shirkah have a right to take part in management of the joint business in
the following transactions: cash or credit sales, rejecting defective goods, renting the partner-
ship’s commercial assets, cancellation of contracts, requesting credit facilities for the partner-
ship, taking the partnership’s receivables, making payments or giving deposits and providing
or receiving pledge for the partnership and doing all that is customary in the interests of the
joint business. They can give short-term/minor loans that may not, according to customary
practice, affect the operation of the partnership. However, the partners are not permitted to
give out grants or loans unless all the partners have given their consent to such an action. 24
Working for the joint business by each partner is not necessary and it can be agreed in
the partnership agreement that the management will be restricted to a single or some iden-
tified partners, in which case the other partners should not act on behalf of the partnership.
The partners can also agree to appoint a manager other than from the partners and pay him
a fixed remuneration that will be treated as an expense of the Shirkah. An outside manager
can also get a part of the investment profit as a good management bonus plus a fixed salary.
However, if the management is carried out from the outset for a share in the profit earned
by the venture, meaning that the manager is working as a Mudarib, he will be entitled only
to the share in the realized profit and will not be given any additional remuneration for his
management services. If a partner contributes to managing the venture or provides some kind
of other service which other partners are not providing, such as accounting, he can be given,
with mutual consent of the other partners, a share of the profit of the venture greater than
that he would receive solely as a partner. A partner can be appointed for any of the services
required by the Shirkah on the basis of an independent employment contract; he can also
be dismissed from the service without the need to amend or terminate the Shirkah contract.25
The matter of indemnification is not the same in the different forms of Shirkah. In Shirkah
al ‘Inan, which is more relevant to us, a partner is Wakil, but not Kafil (agent, but not
indemnifier) of the other partners. Thus, a partner is not liable to indemnify an outsider on
behalf of another partner for a loss during such agency. Al-Kasani opines that the matter
of indemnification is based on and regulated by usage (‘Urf) of the people. This means
that if, in a society, some type of partnership has a presumptive and potential condition of
indemnification as a common usage, the condition will be considered valid.
Partners also have the following rights in the absence of any condition to the contrary: 26
1. To invest the Shirkah capital in Mudarabah.
2. To make any person an agent for any work in the Musharakah.
3. To keep the property of Musharakah with any person as Am ¯anah or deposit or give it
as a loan.
4. To mortgage the property of Shirkah.
5. To travel for the concerned business at the expense of Shirkah.
6. To become a partner in any other Musharakah on behalf of his own Shirkah business.
7. To mix the property of Musharakah with that of his own.
8. To accept the mortgage of property of any outsider on behalf of his Musharakah.
9. Depending upon consent of the other partners and the ‘Urf, spending any sum out of
the Musharakah property.
10. To purchase and sell goods necessary for the conduct of business.
24 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clause 3/1/3/1, p. 202.
25 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clauses 3/1/3/4, 3/1/3/5, p. 203.
26 Al-Sarakhsi, n.d., 11, p. 158.


----- p.316 (pdf 344) -----


316 Understanding Islamic Finance
In all modern forms of Shirkah as well, the partners have equal rights, as mentioned
above. In a partnership concern, the partners, by a mutual agreement, distribute among them
their responsibilities, duties and jobs. In limited companies and cooperative societies, the
shareholders delegate their powers to some of them to be called directors, or some such
name. The partners may appoint a managing partner by mutual consent. Some of the partners
may decide not to work for the Musharakah and work as sleeping partners.
12.3.4 Treatment of Profit and Loss
Profit and loss sharing is a crucial aspect in partnership. As the amount of the share towards
the capital subscribed by each partner can be unequal (except in the case of Mufawadah,
briefly discussed in Section 12.2.2), the share in profits and losses can also be unequal.
It is, however, necessary that the share of all the partners should be decided without any
ambiguity. The generally accepted view, which is based on the views of Imam Ahmad
and Imam Abu Hanifa, is that the ratio of distribution of profit must be agreed upon
at the time of execution of the agreement, otherwise the contract will not be valid in
Shar¯ı´ah.
There is a slight difference of opinion among jurists about a ratio of profit distribution
different from the ratio of investment of two (or more) partners when both of them are
obliged to work on the basis of a Musharakah contract. As a general rule, the shares of profit
and of loss should be commensurate with the share in capital subscribed by each partner.
According to Imam Malik, Imam Shafi‘e and Imam Zufar, each partner shall get the profit
exactly in the proportion of his investment. On the other hand, according to Imam Ahmad
and the majority of Hanafi jurists, the ratio of profit may differ from the ratio of investment,
provided it is agreed with free consent of the parties. 27 The viewpoint of Imam Abu Hanifa
is a combination of both of these views. He says that, normally, the profit distribution ratio
may differ from the investment ratio. But if a partner has made an express condition that
he will not work for the Musharakah and will only be a sleeping partner, then his share of
profit cannot be more than the ratio of his investment. 28 But it can be less than the ratio of
a partner’s capital according to all jurists. Therefore, it is permissible that a partner with a
40 % investment may get 50 % of the profit, provided he has not declared that he will be a
sleeping partner. 29 Hanbali jurists allow even a sleeping partner more than the ratio of his
share in a Musharakah investment. 30
The difference of opinion is not generally taken care of and the general ruling is given
as per the views of Imam Abu Hanifa and Imam Ahmad, according to whom the profit
ratio can differ from the investment ratio on the basis of the amount of work to be done
by the partners, because along with capital, labour and work are also factors for accrual of
profit. Thus, any partner can make a condition that he will get more than the ratio of his
investment as compensation for the work he will be doing for the Shirkah. According to all
27 Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, 5, p. 31; Al-Kasani, 1993, 6, p.63.
28 Al-Kasani, 1993, 6, pp. 62, 63.
29 For details see Usmani, 2000b, pp. 213–215. The principle that “profit is based on agreement of the parties, but loss is always
subject to the ratio of investment” has been derived from the Fiqh of Imam Abu Hanifa and Imam Ahmad. (Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH,
5, p.140; Al-Kasani, 1993, 6, pp. 162, 163). As regards loss, there is complete consensus of the jurists on this part of the principle
(Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, 5, p. 147).
30 Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, 5, pp. 140; Usmani, 2000b, pp. 210–218.


----- p.317 (pdf 345) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 317
contemporary jurists, a loss must be shared exactly in accordance with the ratio of capital
invested by the partners. This principle is given in a famous maxim based on the following
saying of the fourth Pious Caliph of Islam, Ali (Gbpwh): “Profit is based on agreement of
the parties, but loss is always subject to the ratio of investment”. 31 The rationale of this
principle is that earning profit is legitimized by engaging in an economic activity and thereby
contributing to the socio-economic welfare of society. It encompasses equitable risk-sharing
between the provider of capital and the entrepreneur.
The profit ratio must relate to the actual profit accrued to the business and not to the capital
invested by any partner. For example, a profit earned may be distributed between two parties
50:50, 60:40, 30:70, etc. The contract should not lead to any stipulation that profit will be ( )
% on capital or so many dollars/rupees for all or any of the partners. It can also be agreed that
partners A, B and C, for example, will get 30 %, 40 % and 30 % of the net profit earned by the
joint business.32 It is not allowed to fix any lump sum amount of the profit for any partner, or
any rate of profit tied up with the capital invested by a partner.33
If a partner subscribes less capital but works more for the partnership than the other partners,
he may be entitled to an equal share in profits or even more.34 In the same way, if both partners
have an equal share of subscription, their share of profits may be unequal provided that in all
such cases, the working partner is entitled to a bigger share. In the case of loss, there is complete
unanimity among all jurists that each partner in Shirkah shall suffer the loss according to the
ratio of his investment.35
Any partner can withdraw any lump sum amount of profit subject to adjustment at the
time of final settlement and distribution, meaning that any amount drawn by any partner
will be deducted from his share of the profit. But if there is no profit or the actual profit is
less than the anticipated profit, the amount drawn by any partner shall have to be subtracted
from his capital.
Partners can amend, at any point in time, the terms of the partnership contract. They can
amend the ratio of profit-sharing, taking into account that losses are shared according to the
share of each partner in the partnership capital. 36 Once the profit is realized, it has to be
shared as per the agreed ratio. Rules relating to profit in general kinds of Shirkah are given
in Box 12.1.
In a partnership in creditworthiness, the partners should determine at the very beginning
the percentage of profit-sharing and also liability-sharing for all the partners. The ratio of
loss-sharing may differ, downward or upward, with mutual consent, from the percentage
of profit-sharing: “The profit shall be distributed according to the agreement. However, the
loss will be borne by each partner according to the ratio that each partner had undertaken to
bear in proportion to overall assets that are purchased on credit. It is not permitted that the
contract of partnership incorporates a provision that specifies a lump sum from the profit
for any partner”. 37
31 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, p. 221.
32 Al-Kasani, 1993, 6,p .6 2 .
33 Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, 5, pp. 32, 34.
34 Al-Sarakhsi, n.d., 11, p. 157.
35 Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, pp. 33, 62.
36 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clauses 3/1/1/4, 3/1/5.
37 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 3/2, p. 207.


----- p.318 (pdf 346) -----


318 Understanding Islamic Finance
12.3.5 Guarantees in Shirkah Contracts
All partners in Shirkah maintain the assets of the partnership as a trust. Therefore, no one is
liable except in cases of breach of the contract, misconduct or proven negligence. Negligence
will be considered to have occurred in any of the following three cases: (i) a partner does
not abide by the terms and conditions of the contract; (ii) a partner works against the norms
of the concerned business; and (iii) the established ill-intention of a partner. Hence, the
profit or even capital of any partners cannot be guaranteed by the co-partners. However, one
partner can demand from another partner to provide any surety, security or pledge to cover
the cases of misconduct and negligence. 38
Therefore, in the case of a Musharakah agreement between a bank and the business
community, the bank, as a part of risk management and for the judicious use of funds of
the depositors, can obtain adequate security from a partner against his misconduct, breach
of contract and negligence (if any).
Third Party Guarantee in Musharakah
Any third party can also provide a guarantee to make up the loss of capital of all or some
of the partners. This is subject to the conditions:
1. The third party should not be legally and financially related to the Musharakah by owning
more than 50 % of the capital of the guaranteed joint venture.
2. The guaranteed joint venture should not own more than half of the capital of the guarantee-
providing entity.
3. The Shirkah contract should not be conditional on such a guarantee.
4. The guarantee should not be provided for any consideration. In other words, fulfilment
of promise by a third party is not a condition for validity of the contract.
It is important to observe that the third party’s undertaking is actually a “promise to
guarantee” and does not create the right for the beneficiary to relate the Shirkah contract
with fulfilment of the guarantee. The partners in whose favour third party guarantee is given
can neither claim that Shirkah should become null and void nor can they refuse to meet their
obligations under the contract on the grounds that they had entered into Shirkah taking into
account the third party’s undertaking to guarantee the profit or the capital. 39
12.3.6 Maturity/Termination of Musharakah
Musharakah is basically a nonbinding contract, meaning that any partner can withdraw his
share from the partnership at his will. But the partners can agree on any timeframe of Shirkah
business. A traditional Shirkah agreement is terminated in any of the following situations:
1. When the purpose of forming Shirkah is achieved in the case of a specific purpose
Musharakah. While the profit will be distributed according to the agreed profit distribution
ratio, any loss will be borne by each partner according to the ratio of his investment.
2. When, after sufficient information or notice, any partner withdraws from a partnership
after giving his partners due notice to this effect. His withdrawal will not necessitate
38 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clauses 3/1/4/1, 3/1/4/2.
39 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 3/1/4/3, pp. 203, 220, 221.


----- p.319 (pdf 347) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 319
termination of the partnership between the remaining partners. Assets will be distributed
pro rata among the partners with mutual consent and then the profit, if any, will be
distributed on the basis of the agreed ratio. It is preferable that assets are assessed in
terms of monetary value with mutual consent.
3. When any partner dies. However, his heirs can replace him with the consent of the other
parties.
4. When the whole of the Musharakah capital is exhausted or lost.
5. When any partner is prevented or prohibited from exercising his legal powers over his
property.
In the past, the need for early termination of Shirkah contracts normally did not arise, due to
the short life and liquidating nature of joint enterprises that were of the nature of caravan trade.
The classical jurists, therefore, did not feel any need to impose any restrictions on withdrawal
of the partners. Latter jurists have contended that in the case of a partnership among more than
two persons, the contract remains intact even after withdrawal by any partner.40
According to modern practice (‘Urf), a shareholder of a limited company cannot withdraw
from it his capital. He can, however, sell his share to any person desirous of becoming a
shareholder of that company. In the present complicated commercial scenario, public control
and legal structures require a considerable period for all related activities and no partner
or shareholder can be absolved of his liabilities as easily as in the old days. In businesses
that require long gestation periods and huge amounts of capital investment, termination of
the project in between is considered out of the question. The jurists have, however, allowed
changes of ownership through the sale and purchase of shares. 41
Partners can enter into a binding promise for continuity of the partnership for a stipulated
period of time. However, they can terminate the partnership with mutual consent before
such a fixed period. One partner can give a binding promise to buy, within the operation
period or at the time of liquidation, the assets of the partnership at their market value or as
per agreement at the date of buying. A promise to buy at a pre-agreed price or at the face
value of the shares of a company is not allowed in contractual partnerships, as this implies
guarantee of capital of other partner(s), which is not allowed in Shirkatul‘aqd. 42
Box 12.1: Rules Relating to Sharing of Profit/Loss in Shirkah
Rules relating to profit
1. The ratio or the basis for sharing profit should be decided at the beginning of a
partnership.
2. Profit should be allocated in percentages of net earnings (after deducting the operating
costs and expenses) and not in a sum of money or a percentage of the capital or
investment by the partners.
40 Al-Atasi, 1403 AH, Section 352, 4: 277.
41 For details see Usmani, 2000b, pp. 220–231.
42 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clause 3/1/6/2, pp. 207, 222.


----- p.320 (pdf 348) -----


320 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 12.1: (Continued)
3. It is not necessary that agreement for sharing profit should be proportionate to
capital contribution.
4. A sleeping partner cannot share the profit more than the percentage of his capital.
If a partner did not stipulate that he would be a sleeping partner, he is entitled to
get an additional profit share over his percentage of contribution to the capital even
if he did not work. 43
5. The partners may, at a later stage, agree to change the profit-sharing ratio, and on the
date of distribution, a partner may surrender a part of his profit to another partner.
6. One partner can cap his share of profit to a certain amount of money, giving the
profit over and above that cap to the other partner(s).
7. The final allocation of profit is not allowed to be based on expected profit. However,
it is permissible to distribute a provisional profit, subject to final settlement after
actual or constructive liquidation.
8. If the subject matter of Shirkah is a leased asset, the rental amount distributed to the
partners should be on account, subject to settlement and reimbursement according
to the final position. 44
9. It is permissible for partners to decide not to distribute a portion of profit for the
purpose of creation of various reserves. 45
10. Different profit-sharing formulas can be agreed for different periods or the magni-
tude of the realized profits, provided such a formula does not lead to the likelihood
of a partner being precluded from participation in profit. 46
11. Profit distribution/allocation should be made on the basis of actual or constructive
liquidation (valuation of assets) of the venture. Receivables must be valued at the
cash value, i.e. after deduction for an allowance for doubtful debts. For receivables,
it is not permitted to take into account the concept of time value of money or the
notion of discount of the debt amount as consideration for earlier payment. 47
Rules relating to loss
1. All partners will have to share the loss in proportion to their investment.
2. However, it is valid according to the AAOIFI Standard that one partner can take
responsibility for bearing the loss, at the time of loss, without any prior condition. 48
12.4 THE CONCEPT AND RULES OF MUDARABAH
Mudarabah is a special kind of Shirkah in which an investor or a group of investors provides
capital to an agent or manager who has to trade with it; the profit is shared according
43 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 3/1/5/3; also see, for the basis of Shar ¯ı´ah rulings in respect of profit/loss
sharing, pp. 221, 222.
44 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 3/1/5/13.
45 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 3/1/5/15.
46 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 3/1/5/5.
47 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 3/1/5/10.
48 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 3/1/5/4.


----- p.321 (pdf 349) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 321
to the pre-agreed proportion, while the loss has to be borne exclusively by the investor. 49
The loss means a shortfall in the capital or investment of the financier. The loss of the
agent (Mudarib) is by way of expended time and effort, for which he will not be given any
remuneration. There is no restriction on the number of persons giving funds for business or
any restriction on the number of working partners. 50 As discussed in the case of Musharakah,
profit cannot be in the form of a fixed amount or any percentage of the capital employed. 51
Any ambiguity or ignorance regarding capital or ratio of profit makes the contract invalid. 52
If a Mudarabah contract becomes invalid for any reason, the Mudarib will be working for
the necessary period as a wage-earner and will get Ujratul-mithl (fair pay) for his job. He
will not be given any share of the profit.
As evident from various books of Fiqh, the term Mudarabah is interchangeably used with
Qir¯ad and Muqaradah. It is presumed that while the latter two originated in Hijaz, Mudarabah
was of Iraqi origin. Subsequently, the difference appears to have been perpetuated by the
legal schools, the Malikis and Shafi‘es adopting the terms “Qir ¯ad” and “Muqaradah” and
the Hanafis using the term “Mudarabah”. 53
Al-Sarakhsi, in his bookAl-Mabsut, explains the nature of Mudarabah in the following words:
“The term Mudarabah is derived from the expression ‘making a journey’ and it is called this
because the agent (Mudarib) is entitled to the profit by virtue of his effort and work. And he is the
investor’s partner in the profit and in the capital used on the journey and in its dispositions.
The people of Madina call this contract Muqaradah, and that is based on a tradition concerning
‘Uthman, (Gbpwh), who entrusted funds to a man in the form of a Maqarada. This is derived
from al-Qard, which signifies cutting; for, in this contract, the investor cuts off the disposition of
a sum of money from himself and transfers its disposition to the agent. It is therefore designated
accordingly. We, however, have preferred the first term (Mudarabah) because it corresponds to that
which is found in the book of Almighty Allah. He said: ‘while others travel in the land (yadribuna
fil-ard) in search of Allah’s bounty,’ that is to say, travel for the purposes of trade.” 54
With regard to the legality of Mudarabah, Al-Marghinani says in Al-Hidaya:
“There is no difference of opinion among the Muslims about the legality of Qir ¯ad. It was an
institution in the pre-Islamic period and Islam confirmed it. They all agree that the nature of
the Mudarabah business is that a person gives to another person some capital that he uses in
the business. The user gets, according to conditions, some specified proportion, e.g. one-third,
one-fourth or even one-half.”
A number of sayings of the holy Prophet (pbuh) and reports by his Companions on the
subject indicate that Islamic jurists are unanimous on the legitimacy of Mudarabah. 55 The
terms of the Mudarabah contract offered by the Prophet’s uncle Abbas were approved by
the Prophet (pbuh). Abu Musa, the governor of Kufa, wanted to remit public money to the
Bayt al M ¯al. He gave the amount to Abdullah bin Umar and his brother, who traded with it.
The Caliph’s assembly treated it as an ex post facto Mudarabah and took half of the profits
49 Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, p.33.
50 Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, 5,p .3 2 .
51 Al-Marghinani, 1957, 3, p. 256.
52 Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, p.30.
53 Udovitch, 1970, pp. 174–175; AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Mudarabah, clause 4, p. 231.
54 Al-Sarakhsi, n.d., 12,p .1 8 .
55 Al-Sarakhsi, n.d., 12,p .1 8 .


----- p.322 (pdf 350) -----


322 Understanding Islamic Finance
earned by the two brothers, because the public money in their hands was not the loan. Caliph
Umar also used to invest orphans’ property on the basis of Mudarabah.
This practice was rather needed, since weaker members of society could not undertake
long journeys for trading the way that most important professions of Arabs could at that
time. Al-Sarakhsi, in this regard, says:
“Because people have a need for this contract. For the owner of capital may not find his way to
profitable trading activity and the person who can find his way to such activity may not have the
capital. And profit cannot be attained except by means of both of these, that is, capital and trading
activity. By permitting this contract, the goal of both parties is attained”.
By allowing Mudarabah, Islam has intended to fulfil an important economic function by
way of encouraging the hiring of capital and that of trade skills on judicious terms of risk-
sharing, leading to the benefit of society and the concerned parties. The Mudarib has to work
in various capacities like trustee, agent, partner, indemnifier/liable and even wage-earner if
the contract becomes void. Being an agent to the Rabbul-m ¯al, he undertakes the business
and shares the profit. 56
There could also be multilateral and sub-Mudarabahs. A multilateral Mudarabah may take
various forms. A number of financiers may make a contract of Mudarabah with a single
person, or a financier may contract Mudarabah with more than one worker, severally or
jointly. Similarly, a number of workers may associate in order to work for one or more than
one subscriber. As regards a sub-Mudarabah, there seems to be a unanimity of opinion that
a Mudarib may give the Mudarabah capital to a third party on Mudarabah terms only if the
financier has allowed it either in clear terms or has left the business of the Mudarabah to
the discretion of the Mudarib. The absence of the owner’s permission will make the former
contract voidable. 57
Mudarabah, like other contracts, calls for lawful items of trade, failing which the contract
will become void or voidable, as the case may be. Thus, a worker is not allowed to trade
in wine or swine with the Mudarabah capital. The classical jurists generally restricted the
use of Mudarabah to the act of trade (buying/selling) 58, but an overwhelming majority of
contemporary jurists and scholars allow the use of Mudarabah with a wider scope for use
by Islamic banks as an alternative to interest-based financing.
Mudarabah is a contract of fidelity and the Mudarib is considered trustworthy with respect
to the capital entrusted to him. He is not liable for the loss incurred in the normal course
of business activities. As a corollary, he is liable for the property in his care as a result of
the breach of trust, misconduct and negligence. 59 A guarantee to return funds can be taken
from him but can be enforced only in two situations: if he is negligent in the use of funds
or if he breaches the stipulated conditions of Mudarabah. 60 Hence, his actions should be in
consonance with the overall purpose of the contract and within the recognized and customary
commercial practice. In some situations, he becomes an employee when he performs some
duty after the Mudarabah contract becomes invalid.
56 For legality and rationale see AAOIFI, 2004–5a, pp. 240–241.
57 Al Jaziri, 1973, 2, pp. 858–862.
58 This is particularly the view of Shafi‘e jurists (Al Jaziri, 1973, 2, 847–848; see also the relevant chapter in Badai lil K ¯as¯ani).
Among the contemporary jurists, Hasanuz Zaman is in favour of a limited role for Mudarabah (Hasanuz Zaman, 1990).
59 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Mudarabah, clause 4/4, p. 232.
60 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Mudarabah, clauses 4/4, 6.


----- p.323 (pdf 351) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 323
12.4.1 The Nature of Mudarabah Capital
As described in the discussion on Shirkah, Mudarabah capital should preferably be in the form
of legal tender money, because capital in the form of commodities may lead to uncertainties
and disputes. The value of illiquid assets must be clearly determined in terms of legal tender
at the time of entering into the Mudarabah contract and there should be no ambiguity or
uncertainty about its value. It is not permitted to use a debt owed by the Mudarib or another
party to the capital provider as capital in a Mudarabah contract. 61 This is because the capital
to be given for Mudarabah business should be free from all liabilities. The conversion of
debt into a Mudarabah is prohibited to safeguard against the abuse of usurious loan being
camouflaged as a Mudarabah, where, in essence, the financier would possibly ensure for
himself not only the recovery of his debt but also an illegal return on his loan under the
cover of his share in Mudarabah profits. 62 A financier cannot give the Mudarib two different
amounts of capital with the stipulation that profit earned from one should go to him and from
the other to the Mudarib. Similarly, he cannot specify different periods to state that profit
earned in a specific period will be his and that of another period, the Mudarib’s. It is also
not allowed to stipulate that profit from a particular transaction should go to the financier
and the profit from another transaction will belong to the Mudarib. 63
Mixing of Capital by the Mudarib
A Mudarib is normally responsible for the management only and all the investment comes
from the financier. But there may be situations where the Mudarib also wants to invest some
of his money into the business of Mudarabah. In such cases, Musharakah and Mudarabah
are combined. Jurists allow the Mudarib to add his own capital to the capital of Mudarabah
with the permission of the Rabbul-m ¯al. If a Mudarib subscribes his portion of profit or a
portion of capital in the Mudarabah business, he will become a partner to the extent of his
subscription, in addition to his remaining a worker. His rights and liabilities will be governed
by Musharakah rules so long as his capital remains part of the business to the extent of his
share of subscription. For example, A gives $100 000 to a Mudarib B, who also invests his
own funds amounting to $50 000. This is the situation where Mudarabah and Musharakah
have been combined. In this combined business, B (the Mudarib) can stipulate for himself a
certain percentage of profit against his own investment and another percentage for his work
as a Mudarib. In the above example, he has invested one-third of the capital. Therefore,
according to normal business practice, he will get one-third of the actual profit on account
of his investment, while the remaining two-thirds will be distributed between them equally.
However, they may agree on another ratio for distribution.
Islamic banks normally mobilize deposits on Mudarabah principles and invest them in
the business. If a bank also provides funds, it is entitled to get a profit on its own capital in
proportion to the total capital of the Mudarabah. In addition to such a share in the profit, the
bank shall also be entitled to share the remaining profit as Mudarib in an agreed proportion.
For example, depositors provide $2000 for Mudarabah and the bank contributes $1000 to
the business, and it was agreed to share the profit in the ratio 50:50. Let us assume that the
profit earned by the bank as Mudarib is $300. The bank will get $100 as profit on its own
61 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Mudarabah, clause 7/3; also see p. 242.
62 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Mudarabah, p. 242.
63 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, clause 8/6.


----- p.324 (pdf 352) -----


324 Understanding Islamic Finance
investment of $1000. The remaining profit of $200 will be distributed between the bank and
the depositors on the agreed ratio of 50:50. In other words, out of the profit of $200, the
bank will get $100 and the depositors $100.
12.4.2 Types of Mudarabah and Conditions Regarding Business
Mudarabah business can be of two types: restricted and unrestricted Mudarabah. If the
finance provider specifies any particular business, the Mudarib shall undertake business in
that particular business only for items and conditions and the time set by the Rabbul-m ¯al.
This is restricted Mudarabah. But if the Rabbul-m ¯al has left it open for the Mudarib to
undertake any business he wishes, the Mudarib shall be authorized to invest the funds in any
business he deems fit. This is called un-restricted Mudarabah. In both cases, the actions of
the Mudarib should be in accordance with the business customs relating to the Mudarabah
operations: the subject matter of the contract. 64
Accordingly, a Mudarabah contract can be conditional or unconditional. The conditions
may pertain to the nature of the work, the place of work and/or the period of the work.
Conditions binding the worker to trade with a particular person or in a particular commodity,
etc. are, according to Hanafi and Hanbali jurists, permissible, but these make the contract a
special Mudarabah.
It is not legally necessary that the financier directly makes a contract with the Mudarib. 65
Thus, a banker may act as an agent to an investor and become a middle man doing business
on the basis of investment agency (Wakalatul Istism ¯ar).
The financier has a right to impose conditions on a Mudarib, provided they are not
prejudicial to the interests of the business and are not counterproductive to the purpose of
the Mudarabah. For example:
1. He may fix a time limit for the operation of the contract.
2. He may specify the articles to be traded in or whose trade is to be avoided.
3. He may stop the worker from dealing with a particular person or a company.
4. He may stop the worker from travelling to a particular place or may also specify the
place where trade is to be carried out.
5. He may ask the worker to make sure to fulfil his fiduciary responsibilities (but not
profitability).66
6. According to some jurists, he may also compel his worker to sell the goods if the bargain
is profitable (while the worker wants to hold then).
7. He also has a right to stop the worker from contracting a Mudarabah with any other
party.
The Mudarib, on his part, is bound to follow the financier’s conditions. If he violates a
restriction or contravenes a beneficial condition, he becomes a usurper and will be responsible
in respect of capital to the capital owner. He is not entitled to sell the Mudarabah goods
at less than the general market price or buy goods for Mudarabah at a price higher than
the common market price. He is also not allowed to donate Mudarabah funds or waive
receivables of the business without explicit permission from the financier. 67
64 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Mudarabah, clause 5/1.
65 Al Jaziri, 1973, 2, p. 815.
66 Al Jaziri, 1973, 2, p. 851.
67 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Mudarabah, clauses 9/5–9/7, pp. 236, 244.


----- p.325 (pdf 353) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 325
12.4.3 Work for the Mudarabah Business
According to the majority of the traditional jurists, a financier in Mudarabah is not allowed
to work for the joint business. He is not permitted to stipulate that he has a right to work with
a Mudarib and to be involved in selling and buying activities, or supplying and ordering.
However, he has the right to oversee and ensure that the Mudarib is doing his fiduciary
duties honestly and efficiently.
It is only according to Hanbali jurists and, to some extent, Hanafi jurists that the owner is
allowed to work for the business with the Mudarib. The reason for disapproval by the majority
is that it jeopardizes the freedom of the worker to act according to his discretion. 68 This
classical position is understandable if the basic idea that a person enters into a Mudarabah
contract because he lacks business skill is presumed to exist. But if the financier also has skill
and has contracted Mudarabah simply because he cannot do the entire work single-handedly,
the rationale behind prohibiting him to work is not understandable. Moreover, it now seems
more reasonable to allow the owner to ensure honesty and efficiency of the worker by taking
a personal interest in the affairs of the business. Even some Hanafi jurists have allowed the
financier’s sale of Mudarabah goods if it is profitable. 69
In present circumstances, it can be left to the parties, who may agree on any role by the
investor keeping in mind its impact on profitability of the joint business. After transfer of
the capital by the financier, the Mudarib needs to be given independence for the normal
conduct of business. However, the financier can impose restrictions on the Mudarib in terms
of place, object and method of trade. He may also want to have quick and direct access
to his capital and may, for instance, stipulate that the Mudarib may trade within a certain
marketing zone.
12.4.4 Treatment of Profit/Loss
Both parties in Mudarabah are at liberty to agree on the proportion or ratio of profit-sharing
between them with mutual consent. This ratio has to be decided at the time the contract is
concluded. They can agree on equal sharing or allocate different proportions. A lump sum
amount as a profit/return on investment for any of the parties cannot be allowed or agreed
upon. In other words, they can agree on, for example, 50, 40 or 60 % of the profit going
to the Rabbul-m ¯al and the remaining 50, 60 or 40 %, respectively, going to the Mudarib.
Different proportions can be agreed upon for different situations. For example, the financier
can say to the Mudarib: “If you deal in wheat, you will get 50 %, but if you deal in cloth,
you will be given 40 % of the profit. Or if you do business in your town, you will get 40 %
and if in another town, your share in the profit will be 50 %.” Loss, if any, has to be borne by
the financier. Loss means erosion of capital; no profit can be recognized or claimed unless
the capital of Mudarabah is maintained intact. 70
The distribution of profit depends on the final result of the operations at the time of
physical or constructive liquidation of the Mudarabah. Reserves can be created with mutual
consent and if a Mudarabah incurs a loss, the loss can be compensated by the profit of the
future operation of the joint business or the reserves created in the past. At the time of profit
68 The same is the view taken by the AAOIFI, as per its Standard on Mudarabah (clause 9/3; also see p. 244).
69 See Hasanuz Zaman, 1990, pp. 69–88.
70 See, for its basis, AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 243.


----- p.326 (pdf 354) -----


326 Understanding Islamic Finance
allocation, one partner can donate a part of his profit to the other partner(s). A financier can
also award a good management bonus to a Mudarib. If losses are greater than profits at the
time of liquidation, the balance (net loss) has to be deducted from the capital.
Profits are shared when they accrue, but this accrual does not mean a transaction-wise
calculation of the profits; it means the overall adjustment of profits and losses over a particular
period of time, which will be treated as the closing of the accounts but not necessarily the
winding up of the business. However, the partners can provisionally draw the profit that will
be subject to adjustment at the time of finalization of the accounts.
The Mudarib is entitled to a share of profit as soon as it is clear that the operations of the
Mudarabah have led to the realization of a profit. However, this entitlement is not absolute,
as it is subject to the retention of interim profits for the protection of the capital. It will
be an absolute right only after distribution takes place. For valuation, receivables should
be measured at the cash equivalent, or net realizable, value, i.e. after the deduction of a
provision for doubtful debts. In measuring receivables, neither time value nor discount on
current value for an extension of the period of payment shall be taken into consideration. 71
Parties can change the ratio for profit distribution at any time, but that ratio will remain
effective for the period for which it has been mutually fixed. If the parties did not stipulate
the ratio, they should refer to the customary practice, if any, to determine the shares of profit.
If there is no customary practice, the contract will be regarded void ab intio and the Mudarib
will get the common market wage for the kind and amount of service he has rendered. 72
Although one party in Mudarabah cannot stipulate for himself a lump sum amount of
money, the parties can agree with mutual consent that if the profit is over a particular ceiling,
one of the parties can take the greater share of the profit and if the profit is below or equal
to the stipulated ceiling, the distribution will be according to the agreed ratio. The profits
realized from Mudarabah cannot be finally distributed until all expenses have been paid,
in accordance with custom and the original agreement. Final accounting will be undertaken
against the net profits of the Mudarabah operations. The part of profit of the Mudarib
becomes secure after the liquidation of the Mudarabah and the capital owner recovers its
capital and part of profit.
The Mudarib cannot claim any periodical salary or a fee or remuneration for the work
done by him for the Mudarabah business over and above his share as agreed in the contract.
However, Imam Ahmad has allowed the Mudarib to draw his daily expenses of food only
from the Mudarabah account. Hanafi jurists have also restricted the right of the Mudarib to
claim expenses incurred during business journies. The financier and the manager can enter
into a separate agreement, independent of the Mudarabah agreement, for assigning any job
that is not by custom a part of the Mudarabah business against a fee. This means that the
Mudarabah contract will not be affected if the Mudarib is terminated from the service. 73
As a principle, in Mudarabah it is only the financier who bears the loss. However, if a
Mudarib has also contributed capital, which he can do with mutual consent, he will bear the
pro rata loss. If profit has been distributed upon constructive or actual liquidation of business,
it cannot be withdrawn in order to make up for a later loss or for any other purpose. 74 If loss
has occurred in some transactions and profit has been realized in some others, the profit can
71 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Mudarabah, clause 8/8.
72 AAOIFI, 2004–5a Standard on Mudarabah, clause 8/4.
73 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Mudarabah, clause 8/2.
74 Al Jaziri, 1973, 2, pp. 862–865.


----- p.327 (pdf 355) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 327
be used to offset the loss at the first instance, then the remainder, if any, shall be distributed
between the parties according to the agreed ratio.
12.4.5 Termination of a Mudarabah Contract
The general principle is that Mudarabah is not a binding contract and each of the parties can
terminate it unilaterally except in two cases: (i) when the Mudarib has already commenced the
business, in which case the contract becomes binding up to the date of actual or constructive
liquidation; and (ii) when the parties agree on a certain duration of the contract, in which
case it cannot be terminated before expiry of that period except with mutual agreement.
For termination, the Mudarib will be given time to sell the illiquid assets so that an actual
amount of profit may be determined. 75
The unlimited power to terminate the Mudarabah may create difficulties in the context
of the present circumstances, because most commercial enterprises today need time to bear
fruit. Modern businesses also demand continuous and complex efforts. Therefore, if the
parties agree, while entering into the Mudarabah, that no party shall terminate it during a
specified period, except in specified circumstances, it does not seem to violate any principle
of Shar ¯ı´ah, particularly in the light of the famous Hadith which says: “All the conditions
agreed upon by the Muslims are upheld, except a condition which allows what is prohibited
or prohibits what is lawful in Shar ¯ı´ah.”
If all assets of the Mudarabah are in cash form at the time of termination, and some
profit has been earned on the principal amount, it shall be distributed between the parties
according to the agreed ratio. However, if the assets of the Mudarabah are not in cash form,
the Mudarib shall be given an opportunity to sell and liquidate them, so that the actual profit
may be determined.
A restricted Mudarabah will automatically wind up after the object is achieved. If the
Mudarabah is general, it will be in the interests of both parties to wind up at will whenever
both of them mutually agree to do so. The difficulty may arise if one of the parties wants
to continue business. Reconciliation on this point should be sought through a court or any
arbitration.
12.5 MUDARABAH DISTINGUISHED FROM MUSHARAKAH
Mudarabah is distinguished from Musharakah briefly on the following grounds:
1. The investment in Musharakah comes from all the partners, while in Mudarabah, invest-
ment comes from a person or a group of persons, but not from the Mudarib. 76
2. In Musharakah, all partners have a right to participate in the management of the business
and can work for it, while in Mudarabah, the Rabbul-m ¯al has no right to participate in
management. With mutual consent, however, he can work for the venture. Further, the
financier has the right to ensure that the Mudarib is doing his fiduciary duties in the true
sense.
3. In Musharakah, all the partners share the loss according to the ratio of their investment,
while in Mudarabah, the loss, if any, is suffered by the Rabbul-m ¯al only. However, if
75 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Mudarabah, clause 10.
76 Usmani, 2000a, pp. 47–49.


----- p.328 (pdf 356) -----


328 Understanding Islamic Finance
the Mudarib has conducted business with negligence or has been dishonest, he shall be
liable for the loss caused by his negligence or misconduct.
4. The liability of the partners in Musharakah is normally unlimited. However, if all the
partners have agreed that no partner shall incur any debt during the course of business,
then the liabilities exceeding assets shall be borne by that partner alone who has incurred a
debt on the business in violation of the aforesaid condition. Contrary to this, in Mudarabah,
the liability of the Rabbul-m ¯al is limited to his investment unless he has permitted the
Mudarib to incur debts on his behalf. 77
5. In Musharakah, profit can be distributed on an annual, quarterly or monthly basis by
valuation of the assets. 78 In the case of Mudarabah, final distribution can take place only
after liquidation of the Mudarabah business. However, on account payment of profit is
possible subject to ultimate adjustment. 79 To avoid problems in perpetual Mudarabah, the
contemporary jurists have accepted the concept of constructive liquidation of assets by
determining the market value of nonliquid assets. 80
6. In Musharakah, all assets of the Musharakah become jointly owned by all of the partners
according to the proportion of their respective investment. Therefore, each one of them
can benefit from the appreciation in the value of the assets, even if profit has not accrued
through sales. In Mudarabah, however, all the goods/assets purchased by the Mudarib are
solely owned by the Rabbul-m ¯al, and the Mudarib can earn his share in the profit only if
he sells the assets profitably. However, there are some exceptions to this rule according
to a minority view.
7. If the Mudarabah business is dissolved, its assets and profit, if any, can be distributed only
after assessing its value in terms of money. In the case of Shirkah, this is not necessary. 81
12.6 MODERN CORPORATIONS: JOINT STOCK COMPANIES
Modern corporate bodies can be considered to be based on the concept of Shirkah al ‘Inan
or a combination of Musharakah and Mudarabah, which is allowed by the generality of
the contemporary jurists. 82 There are a number of forms of modern corporations, including
joint stock companies with limited liability, joint liability companies (a form of personal
partnership), companies limited by shares (also a kind of personal partnership), partnerships
in commendum (a form of financing partnership), etc. 83 The general principles governing
these forms are the same and we will be discussing mainly the modern stock companies
with limited liability of the shareholders.
The main ingredient of modern corporate business is the issuance of shares or certificates
to the investors in a joint business. A large number of people provide funds and are issued
any specific type of receipts that are called shares or a variety of certificates that represent
the proportionate ownership of the shareholders. The AAOIFI Standard on Musharakah has
defined a stock company as an entity, the capital of which is distributed into equal units of
77 Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, pp. 18, 35.
78 Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, pp. 5, 64.
79 AlJaziri, 1973, 3,p .6 1 .
80 Usmani, 2000b, pp. 276–283.
81 Al-Kasani, 1993, 6,p .7 7 .
82 Usmani, 2000b, pp. 313–329.
83 See, for details, AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, pp. 208–213.


----- p.329 (pdf 357) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 329
tradable shares with limited liability of the shareholders to their pro rata capital. The rules
relating to Shirkah al ‘Inan are applicable to it except on the issue of the limited liability of
the shareholders. In other words, shareholders are owners of the assets of the company to
the extent of shares held by them. They can sell/transfer the shares to any other persons but
have no discretion over the assets of the company. 84
A company incorporated by law is considered a juristic personality, and as such, cannot
avoid its obligations to people dealing with it. This separates the liability of the company
from the liability of the shareholders. The company’s liability can be limited to its paid-up
capital if it is made public in order to make the customers aware of its financial position. It
involves a binding contract for continuity in terms of its Articles of Association. Therefore,
no one is entitled to terminate the company in terms of his shares. However, a shareholder
can sell his shares or relinquish title to them in favour of other people.
The capital contribution for subscription to shares can be made in a lump sum or in
instalments. Unpaid instalments would constitute an undertaking to increase the share in the
company subsequently. It is permissible to issue new shares in order to increase the capital,
provided the new shares are issued at the fair value of the old shares – this can be at a
premium, discount or at the nominal value of the shares. 85 Preference shares having special
financial characteristics that give their holders a priority for profit allocation at the time of
the company’s liquidation do not conform to the Shar ¯ı´ah principles. 86
IFIs can purchase or sell shares of any company subject to the condition that the company
is undertaking a Halal business. The price of the shares can be less or more than their
nominal value, provided more than 50 % of its shares comprise fixed assets, i.e. liquid assets
(cash plus receivables) are less than 50 %. If the major business of any company is not
against Shar¯ı´ah and some of its transactions involve un-Islamic elements, like dealing with
interest-based institutions, its shares can also be purchased, provided the part of income
representing interest, if identified, is given to charity.
One cannot sell shares that one does not own and a promise by a broker to lend a share to
a short-seller at the date of delivery does not refer to ownership or possession of the shares.
Shares can also be pledged, because anything that can be sold can also be given as pledge. 87
Shares that are gradually redeemed before the termination of the company only through
the distribution of profits by the company do not conform to the Shar ¯ı´ah principles. This is
because the funds the certificate holders receive constitute profit in respect of their shares.
The claim that the participations be redeemed in consideration for the distributed profit is
invalid. Therefore, the certificate holders remain owners of the shares and are entitled to
proceeds when the company is liquidated. 88
Preference shares, on the basis of which some of the partners in a concern are earmarked
a fixed percentage of dividends, do not fulfil the principles of Shar ¯ı´ah. The basic principle
of distribution of profit is that no gain can be had without undertaking to bear the risk of
loss. In this respect, all the subscribing partners of a company should be treated alike, based
on the number of shares held by them. Similarly, if any of the partners has been privileged
to share in profits only without sharing in losses, the partnership contract is deemed to have
84 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 4/1/1; Usmani, 2000b, p.330.
85 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 4/1/2/3.
86 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 4/1/2/14.
87 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 4/1/2/7; also at p. 223.
88 See Resolution No. 63(1/7) of the International Islamic Fiqh Academy; AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause
4/1/2/15, pp. 210, 224.


----- p.330 (pdf 358) -----


330 Understanding Islamic Finance
become void due to the element of interest. The case of qualification shares is, however,
different, as it determines the minimum extent of attention and devotion of the directors
without any preferential treatment in pecuniary entitlement.
Underwriting is a crucial part of the business related to modern corporations. A share-
holder or any third party can underwrite an issue of shares without any consideration. The
underwriter will undertake, by an agreement at the time of incorporation of the company
or shares issue, to buy all or a part of the shares issue. It undertakes to buy the remaining
shares at nominal value that are not subscribed through public or private placements. The
underwriter can charge for services provided, other than the underwriting, such as conducting
feasibility studies or marketing the shares. 89
The actual rules of modern corporate business require more detailed analysis.
Shares/certificates are floated for raising liquid assets. Trading in assets that represent the
underlying assets is permissible as long as real assets and services constitute the majority of
the total assets. As such, the instruments or shares represent only the money, they cannot be
traded so long as the capital is in liquid form, i.e. in the form of cash raised or receivables
or advances due from others. This is because the shares represent pro rata ownership of
shareholders in the joint business/project. If the capital is still in liquid form, the shares may
be sold only at face value, otherwise it would mean that money is being exchanged for more
money, which is Riba. However, when the raised money is employed in purchasing nonliquid
assets, like land, buildings, machinery, raw material, furniture, etc., the shares/Musharakah
certificates will represent the holders’ proportionate ownership in these assets. In this case,
it will be allowed by the Shar ¯ı´ah to sell these certificates in the secondary market for any
price agreed upon between the parties, which may be more or less than the face value of the
shares/certificates, because the subject matter of the sale is a share in the tangible assets and
not in money only; therefore, the certificate may be taken as any other commodity which
can be sold with profit or at a loss.
Another major feature of the present corporate structure is that running projects are
normally a mixture of liquid and tangible assets, e.g. in the form of raw material, fixed assets,
inventory of finished goods, sales proceeds, receivables (that being debt is treated as liquid,
like money), etc. The opinion of contemporary jurists regarding the Shar ¯ı´ah position of
trading in shares of entities having mixed liquid and nonliquid assets is different. According
to the classical jurists of the Shafi‘e school, combined assets of a business cannot be sold
unless the tangible assets are separated and sold independently. Hanafi jurists, however, are
of the view that a combination of liquid and tangible assets can be sold/purchased for an
amount that is greater than the amount of liquid assets in the combined assets. They prescribe
no specific proportion of tangible assets to qualify for permission of such a sale/purchase.
However, most of the contemporary scholars, including those of the Shafi‘e school, have
allowed trading in the shares and certificates only if the nonliquid assets of the business are
more than 50 %, while some reduce this floor to 33 %.
Other principles relating to stocks have been discussed in Chapter 8.
12.7 MODERN APPLICATION OF THE CONCEPT OF SHIRKAH
Keeping in mind the broad principles and the concept of Shirkah, Musharakah and Mudarabah
can be used for evolving a new system, both on the liabilities and assets sides of the financial
89 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 4/1/2/4; also at p. 223.


----- p.331 (pdf 359) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 331
system, that conforms to the requirements of Shar ¯ı´ah and also fulfils the needs of trade and
business. It may take the form of corporate firms, mutual funds, Mudarabah companies, indi-
vidual or multi-investment portfolios by fund managers, business participation certificates,
Musharakah agreements, project financing, running Musharakah and partnership businesses,
certificates of investment or Diminishing Musharakah for facilitating financing fixed assets,
trade and services. A combination of Shirkatulamwal and Shirkatula‘mal can be used for
service firms of the modern age in medicine, law, IT, architecture and other fields. 90
12.7.1 Use of Shirkah on the Deposits Side of the Banking System
According to the Shar ¯ı´ah principles, whatever is permissible for an individual is also
permissible for a group of people. Based on this principle, Shirkah, which conventionally
was an individual contract carried out by an owner of funds with a Mudarib, has now
become a group activity. The main relationship between depositors and Islamic banks is that
of financiers and Mudaribs. All deposits are pooled, the bank invests the pooled amount in
business, all direct expenses are charged to the pool while expenses related to the general
management or Head Office expenses are borne by the bank (Mudarib) itself, and the
net proceeds are distributed among depositors according to the stipulated ratios. Different
weightages can be assigned to different depositors depending upon their tenure and size,
subject to the condition of sufficient disclosure to all depositors. For the purpose of profit
distribution among partners, there is constructive liquidation after a tenure or accounting
period and then the joint relationship starts afresh for the next accounting period.
Banks normally also put a part of their equity into the pool. In terms of the rules, the
relationship will be of Musharakah if they put their part in the pool at the beginning of
pool creation and that of Mudarabah if subsequently. In the latter case, the bank will be an
investor just like the other depositors. All pool members will be partners among themselves
and the bank will serve as Mudarib. The overall relationship will remain one of Mudarib
and Rabbul-m ¯al, because in the case of Musharakah, all partners would have the right to
participate in the appreciation of the business as a whole, which is not the case for the
banks’ depositors. Further, depositors are like sleeping partners and normally have no right
in management and business decisions. This Mudarabah relationship is clearer in the case
of special investors or portfolio accounts maintained by depositors, investment of which is
made by banks in the light of depositors’ directives.
The longer the tenor of deposits, the greater the weightage assigned to them. Banks can
assign preferential weightages to various categories of deposits, like those of the old/pensioners,
welfare associations, etc. But assigning different weightages to bigger sizes of deposit as a
matter of course would not be a good practice, keeping in mind the principle of justice.
According to the rules of Mudarabah, all financial losses, if any, should be borne by the
pool as Rabbul-m ¯al. However, in such a case, the bank should also not earn any amount
against its services. A loss attributable to the pool should be distributed among the pool
members according to their investment as per the rules of Musharakah, i.e. according to
their investment ratio.
The bank should cover all expenses from its own share of profit within the Mudarabah
arrangement. Weightages can only be amended at the beginning of the accounting period,
which can be a month or a quarter. The bank can have a right to reduce/withdraw the
90 Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, 5, p. 9; Usmani, 2000b, pp. 292–308.


----- p.332 (pdf 360) -----


332 Understanding Islamic Finance
profit-sharing ratio in the Mudarabah arrangement in favour of the pool. The bank may also
invest in the pool as a depositor.
All accounts should be linked to respective pools containing more than 50 % Ijarah or other
fixed assets to allow premature withdrawal. However, if the Hanafi view is adopted, early
withdrawal will be allowed even if the nonliquid assets are more than 10 % of its total worth.
Savers/investors offer funds to Islamic mutual funds or banks on a Mudarabah basis, who
mix those funds with their own funds and offer them to users who seek Shar ¯ı´ah-compatible
financing. Hence, Islamic financial institutions play the role of intermediary along with that
of partner, as reflected in taking the funds, considering customer requests, following up
repayments, distributing realized profits and many other functions.
The system of profit allocation between the banks’ equity and investment account holders
is important, because it deals with fundamental and ethical aspects relating to the concept of
fairness in the Islamic alternative that Islamic banks offer as opposed to interest-based banks.
It requires disclosure of information regarding the business and the profit-sharing formulas.
The principles of fairness and trust emphasize the importance of the individuals’ confidence
in the Islamic banks’ ability to achieve their investment goals. Disclosure should be made
about significant accounting policies, weightages assigned on the basis of the tenor and the
size of accounts, expenses to be charged and the basis applied by the Islamic bank in the
allocation of profits between owners’ equity and unrestricted investment account holders.
12.7.2 Use of Shirkah on the Assets Side
The best alternative to interest for financing by banks is considered to be a Shirkah arrange-
ment that could be in the form of Mudarabah, Musharakah or investments through Shirkah-
based certificates or Sukuk. Mudarabah can be best used for financing of import trade on a
single transaction or consignment basis in the case of a firm order and L/C without margin,
where the whole investment has to be made by the bank. Its use is also possible for running
businesses, project financing and for the purpose of securitization.
Musharakah can be applied in trade finance without complexities, since the chances of
fraud, negligence and other problems are relatively lower in international trade than in other
Musharakah-based projects. A bank may enter into a Musharakah arrangement with a client
who intends to import; the bank may also appoint him as agent for acquisition and disposal
of the goods after the same are imported; an L/C could be opened in the bank’s or the
client’s name. The net profit out of this limited purpose Musharakah will be shared between
the bank and the client in an agreed ratio. The above procedure can also be adopted in
respect of bills drawn under inland L/Cs. Detailed procedures for import financing under
Musharakah are given in Chapter 14.
In the case of export finance under L/C, the goods will be acquired and made ready for
shipment on a Musharakah basis. The client will prepare the export documents strictly in
accordance with the terms of the L/C and undertake to indemnify the bank for any loss in
case of his failure to honour his commitment. Export proceeds will be distributed according
to the agreed ratio. If there is no L/C involved, the merchandise will be made ready for export
under joint ownership of the bank and the client. However, details of all such transactions
will have to be worked out in consultation with the commercial bankers who are actually
involved in the business.
The following could be the procedure for export financing on the basis of Shirkah: the
exporter receives an order from abroad to export a specific commodity/goods at a known
price. He estimates its expected profit. If he needs financing for manufacturing/procurement


----- p.333 (pdf 361) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 333
of the goods, the bank can provide financing on the basis of Shirkah. Profit would be shared
on a pre-agreed percentage. The bank can secure itself from any negligence on the part
of the exporter. However, being a partner of the business, the bank will be liable to bear
any loss which may be caused due to any reason other than the negligence of the exporter.
However, in order to undertake such an operation, banks need to understand the nature of
the exporter’s business and other requirements.
Banks can also provide Musharakah-based financing through Musharakah agreements
with their clients. It is observed that a Shar ¯ı´ah expert would not have any objection if
the banks make a provision in the Musharakah agreements giving them the right, on an
agreed formula, to convert their investment outstanding at any time during the currency of
the agreement into ordinary shares of the company. The details can be worked out by the
experts. The client may be required to seek clearance from the bank before declaration of
any dividend. There should also be a provision for adjudication to resolve any differences
between the parties. There may be a review or a resolution committee with members named
in the Musharakah agreement to deal with the issues of breach of contract by either of the
parties. It seems imperative that banks shall employ some mechanics for monitoring the
affairs of the concerned companies. They will have to gear up their machinery for a more
thorough appraisal of the project feasibility and other aspects in the preliminary stages as
well as for subsequent monitoring of projects’ implementation.
In the case of project financing, the traditional method of Shirkah can be easily adopted.
If the financier wants to finance the whole project, the form of Mudarabah can be used. If
investment comes from both sides, the form of Musharakah would be more suitable. In this
case, if the management is the sole responsibility of one party, a combination of Musharakah
and Mudarabah can also be used according to the rules.
The following may be the flow of transactions in the case of Musharakah for running
business:
1. A running Musharakah Account for the client will be opened in the books of the financ-
ing bank.
2. The client’s proceeds from the sale of finished of goods will be credited in the Running
Musharakah Account.
3. The client’s cash flows generated from investment activities (for example, sales proceeds
from the disposal of fixed assets) and cash flows from long-term financing activities (for
example, long-term finance availed for the project) cannot be credited in the Running
Musharakah Account.
4. For determination of the period of running Musharakah limit, all the clients of the bank
will be divided into the following three categories: seasonal, cyclical and continued
operation.
5. At the end of each quarter or month, as the case may be, the profit earned by the client
in the Musharakah will be paid to the bank.
6. The profit-sharing will be based on the computed operating profit for the same period
for which the running Musharakah limit was awarded. 91
Shirkah can also be used for financing through the purchase of Musharakah/Mudarabah
certificates like Shirkah-based Sukuk, term finance certificates (TFCs) or participation term
91 For details, see Usmani, 2000a, pp. 55–81.


----- p.334 (pdf 362) -----


334 Understanding Islamic Finance
certificates (PTCs). Certificates issued on the principle of Shirkah are negotiable instruments
issued by a company in consideration of any fund, money or accommodation received or to
be received by it whether in cash or in kind, or against any promise, guarantee, undertaking
or indemnity issued for its benefit. The problem of moral hazard would be much less in the
case of TFCs/PTCs than in the case of direct Musharakah investments.
However, banks indicate a number of risks and problems in the case of Shirkah-based
financing. For example, the managing partner may manipulate the financial reporting in
order to deceive the Islamic bank. They may be unwilling to disclose actual profits to the
bank, exposing it to the risk of return on its investment. Guarantee/collateral can be taken
only to safeguard against negligence and misconduct. The partners may allocate indirect and
personal expenses in Musharakah operations. Legal capacity and financial stability of the
guarantors have to be independent from the Musharakah contract. The Islamic bank, as the
buying partner in a Diminishing Musharakah, may be exposed to fluctuations in unit price
if it is not fixed at the beginning of the contract.
The main obstacles in the way of widespread use of Musharakah stem from the lack of
documentation, defective taxation systems and the lack of effort on the part of the bankers
themselves. In the view of this author, Islamic banks have not made serious efforts to apply
this system simply because of the easy and less risky alternatives based on Murabaha and
leasing. Musharakah could have been safely applied at least for trading and project financing
if they had undertaken some research and taken initiatives to realize the potential of this
most preferable mode of Islamic finance. In the following pages we shall give some case
studies in this regard.
12.7.3 Securitization on a Shirkah Basis
A security, in financial terms, can be defined as an asset in the form of a paper whose cash
flow is backed by a pool of liquid and tangible assets. Through securitization, tangible or
nonliquid assts of joint business are made negotiable through the sale of shares/certificates
in the financial market.
Musharakah can easily be adopted as a basis for securitization, especially in the case of
big projects where huge amounts are required. Every subscriber can be given a certificate
representing his proportionate ownership in the assets of the joint business, and after the
project is started by acquiring substantial nonliquid assets, these Musharakah certificates can
be treated as negotiable instruments and can be bought and sold in the secondary market.
Musharakah and Mudarabah Sukuk can be issued as redeemable certificates by or to
the corporate sector or to individuals for their rehabilitation/employment, for purchase of
automobiles for their commercial use or for the establishment of high-standard clinics,
hospitals, factories, trading centres, endowments, etc. This we shall discuss in detail in
Chapter 15.
Box 12.2: Case Study on the Use of Musharakah for Trade Financing
Islamic banks normally use Murabaha in trade financing and Musharakah and
Mudarabah are avoided because of the perception of more risk. Shirkah-based modes
can be applied in export and import finance without complexities, particularly in respect
of single transactions and export/import consignments. However, in order to undertake
such operations, Islamic banks need to understand the nature of the exporter’s business


----- p.335 (pdf 363) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 335
and other requirements. A possible procedure for trade financing under Musharakah
and Mudarabah is given below:
1. The exporter receives an order from abroad to export a specific commodity/good
at a known price. He prepares estimates of cost and his expected profit.
2. He needs financing for manufacturing/procurement of the goods and asks the bank
to provide finance on the basis of Shirkah. The bank enters into an agreement,
according to which profit will be shared on a pre-agreed percentage.
3. The bank can get a guarantee/security to protect itself from misconduct, breach
of contract or negligence on the part of the client. However, being a partner of
the exporter, the bank will be liable to bear any loss which may be caused due
to any reason other than the negligence of the exporter.
A practical application of a similar transaction of import finance is discussed in the
following case study.
A huge utility organization awards a contract to a local supplier (ABC & Co) for
the supply of equipment that has to be imported. ABC & Co is interested in financing
the transaction through a Musharakah arrangement with an Islamic bank. The structure
of the product is developed on a partnership by creditworthiness basis (Shirkatul
Wujooh), in which the partners have no investment at all. They purchase goods on
credit and sell them at spot. The profit so earned is distributed between them at an
agreed ratio. The process of the transaction consists of the following steps:
1. ABC & Co opens a Usance L/C of Rs. 10 million, which is issued by an Islamic bank
(bank financing on a participation basis) in favour of M/s XYZ Machines, Italy.
2. XYZ Machines agrees to give a credit period of 180 days.
3. Equipment is shipped to the importing country through air cargo due to the
sensitivity of the equipment.
4. ABC & Co inspects the goods and confirms its satisfaction to the bank, upon
which the Islamic bank conveys its acceptance of the documents to the negotiat-
ing bank.
5. Customs take 30 days for the clearing of the equipment.
6. ABC & Co take around 50 days to install the equipment.
7. After the installation, the utility organization inspects and tests the equipment for
its performance.
8. As soon as the satisfaction certificate is issued, a bill is lodged for payment.
9. Payment is received within 150 days of shipment.
10. Profit is distributed among the partners as per the agreed ratio.
11. The Islamic bank settles the L/C on the due date.
Box 12.3: Musharakah-based TFCs Issued by Sitara Industries, Pakistan
An excellent example of Musharakah-based financing through the issuance of partic-
ipatory instruments is that of the 5-year term finance certificates (TFCs) worth Pak
Rupees 360 million issued by Sitara Chemical Industries, a public limited company in
Pakistan, in June 2002. The amount raised through the TFC issue was utilized to meet


----- p.336 (pdf 364) -----


336 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 12.3: (Continued)
a part of the cost of an expansion project of the company. The TFCs are based on
the mechanism of Shirkah and are tradable in the securities market. The payment of
profit or sharing of loss is linked to the operating profit or loss of the company. The
investors assume the risk of sustaining losses proportionate to their principal amount
in the case of any operating losses incurred by Sitara. Changes in any government
regulations may also affect the profitability of the TFCs. By investing in the TFCs,
an investor also assumes the risk of not being able to sell the TFC without adversely
affecting the price.
Profit is paid on a six-monthly basis. For the purposes of sharing profit with the
TFC holders, the level of yearly operating profit is divided into two tiers, as described
below under the headings of Level I Profit and Level II Profit.
Level I Profit
On the first Rs. 100 million operating profit at 12 % p.a. of the outstanding principal.
The rate of 12 % has been taken as a projected rate by reverse accounting on the basis
of a sharing ratio. The rate of percentage profit entitlement shall be proportionately
reduced if operating profit is less than Rs. 100 million, as follows: (Actual operating
profit / Rs.100 million) × 12 % = Actual profit entitlement rate for Level I profit.
Level II Profit
2 % p.a. of the outstanding principal on each subsequent Rs. 100 million operating
profit (over and above Rs.100 million). One quarter of this profit will be transferred
into the Takaful reserve and the balance will be distributed to the TFC holders. The rate
of profit entitlement shall be proportionately reduced if the actual figure of subsequent
operating profit falls in between two successive slabs of Rs. 100 million of operating
profit, as follows: (Actual operating profit / Rs.100 million) × 2% = Actual profit
entitlement rate for Level II profit.
If the final profit payment of a year is in excess of the on-account profit payments
already paid to the TFC holders, the excess amount will be paid along with the next
six-monthly on-account profit payment. However, if the on-account payments that
have already been made for the year are in excess of the final profit share of the
TFC holders, then the excess will be adjusted as per a predecided procedure. If the
operating profit is more than Level I profit, the profit-sharing arrangement applicable
on Level II profit is followed.
If, upon finalization of the annual audited accounts, a loss is incurred, the on-account
profit payment has to be adjusted. The loss attributable to the TFC holders will be
offset against the Takaful reserve created for the purpose. If the amount available in
the Takaful reserve is insufficient to absorb the entire loss attributable to the TFC
holders, the unabsorbed losses will be adjusted against the principal amount at the
time of redemption of the principal amount.
The face value of each TFC issued to the general public is Rs. 5000. The principal
amount has to be redeemed at the end of the third, fourth and fifth years from
July 1, 2002. The amount of principal redemption at the end of the third year may be
Rs. 1650/-, at the end of the fourth year Rs. 1650/- and at the end of the fifth year


----- p.337 (pdf 365) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 337
Rs. 1700/-. The principal redemption in each above-mentioned year will be subject to
profit/loss adjustments.
NB: Sitara TFCs remained highly profitable; they gave a profit between 15 and 24 %
per annum. The TFCs are not available in the secondary market as the holders locked
in, keeping in mind the high profitability.
12.8 DIMINISHING MUSHARAKAH
The participatory contracts that may be more suitable for financing of fixed assets and
present-day ongoing projects, particularly for financial intermediaries, can be based on the
concept of “Diminishing Musharakah” (DM). In the Diminishing Musharakah contract, a
party, after participation in ownership of any business/project, can liquidate his investment
from the asset or the ongoing business. The jurists are unanimous on the permissibility of
this arrangement. 92 DM contracts contain a sale provision, according to which, one partner
makes a promise to sell his part of ownership to the other party periodically. As discussed
earlier, jurists have opined that promises are enforceable, and a court of law can compel a
promisor to fulfil his promise, especially in the context of commercial activities. 93
Diminishing Musharakah as a financing technique, however, is a new type of contract,
suggested by contemporary jurists keeping in mind the problems perceived while discussing
the traditional Musharakah/Mudarabah principles in the broader economic perspective. This
involves the concept of Musha‘a, which means undivided ownership of the asset by the
partners. All co-owners are owners of each and every part of the joint property on a pro rata
basis and one partner cannot claim a specific part of the property leaving other part(s) for
other partners. Further, it is allowed to lease Musha‘a to another joint owner.
A DM arrangement may consist of two or three subcontracts, i.e. in the case of assets that
could render any service, and hence they could be leased, there would be three subcontracts:
partnership by ownership between two or more persons, leasing by one partner its share in the
asset to the other partner(s), selling by one partner its share to the other partner(s); and in the case
of partnership in trade of assets that do not involve leasing, it would involve two subcontracts:
partnership and sale. This factually becomes a general partnership and all rules of Shirkahal
‘Inan are applicable to it. One major point to be taken into consideration in this type of DM
arrangement is that one partner cannot sell his part to the other partner at a pre-agreed price.94
All, two or three subcontracts are considered permissible by the jurists, particularly when
the sale/lease contracts are stipulated among the partners, i.e. assets are sold/leased to the
partners.95 Thus, the combination of Shirkah and lease contracts does not create any Shar ¯ı´ah-
related problem. Sale of a part by a partner to the other partner should be separate and
independent from the Shirkah or leasing arrangement.
There is some difference of opinion regarding leasing out an undivided share to a third
party. While Imams Malik, Shafi‘e and Abu Yusuf allow it, Imams Abu Hanifa and Zufur
disallow the letting out of the undivided share to any third party. As per the present practice
92 Al-Kasani, 1993, 4, p. 493.
93 For details, see Usmani, 2000b, pp. 363–368.
94 Usmani, 2000a, pp. 91, 92.
95 Ibn-Qudama, 1367 AH, 6, p. 137; for details see Usmani, 2000b, pp. 357–360; AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 215.


----- p.338 (pdf 366) -----


338 Understanding Islamic Finance
of Islamic financial institutions, DM is being used in such a manner that lease/sale is made
to the co-partners, in respect of which there is no difference of opinion among the jurists.
We can infer from the contemporary juristic opinion that any arrangement in which three
separate agreements of partnership, leasing and sale are made in such a way that they are
not conditional upon one another and are separately enforceable, will be according to the
principles of Shar ¯ı´ah and therefore Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant. However, if the three contracts are
stipulated collectively, this is not approved by the jurists, as discussed in Chapter 5. Even
the Hanbali jurists, who allow imposing some conditions in a sale contract, do not approve
of a contract, the enforcement of which depends upon any other contract. The relationship
among the parties in this arrangement is that of partners and lessor/lessee in the first instance
and seller and buyer at the later stage. The sale has to be kept independent from the first
part, comprising partnership and leasing.
Diminishing Musharakah can be conducted both in respect of partnership in ownership
(Shirkatulmilk) and contractual partnership (Shirkatul‘aqd). But some crucial differences
between the two have to be taken into consideration to ensure Shar ¯ı´ah compliance:
1. In Diminishing Musharakah through contractual partnership, the ratio of profit distribution
for each partner should be clearly determined, this may be disproportionate to the ratio
of equity of both parties. This ratio can be changed with mutual agreement due to a
change in the ratio of equity share of the parties. A loss would necessarily be allocated
in accordance with the ratio of equity at the time when the loss is incurred. No partner
can be given a lump sum amount out of the profits. 96
As regards partnership by ownership, the major objective of its forming is not profit-
earning through business; therefore, the ratio of profit distribution need not be stipulated
in this arrangement. Each partner will own both risk and reward proportionate to his share.
As one partner can lease his part to the co-partner, he can get rental on the leased part.
The lessee, who is owner of a part of the asset, will get the reward of his part by using the
asset without paying any rent. As the lessee partner goes on purchasing the share of the
financier partner, the rental goes on decreasing. Both parties will bear ownership-related
expenses/liabilities and losses, if any in the case of sale, on a pro rata basis.
2. In Diminishing Musharakah through partnership by contract, the lessee partner can
promise to buy periodically the share of the financier partner according to the market
value or at a price to be agreed at the time of sale of units of the asset. It is not permitted
to stipulate that the ownership units will be bought at a pre-agreed price or at their original
or fair value, as this would constitute a guarantee of share capital of one partner by the
other partner, which is prohibited by the Shar ¯ı´ah.
In Diminishing Musharakah through partnership by ownership, one partner can pur-
chase ownership units of the co-partner at a pre-agreed price. This is a crucial difference
between the two, particularly in respect of Shar ¯ı´ah compliance of the procedure and
the payment of price for transfer of ownership from the Islamic financial institutions to
their clients. The IFIs that provide housing finance on the basis of DM in Shirkatulmilk
generally take promise from the clients that they will purchase the banks’ units of shares
at pre-agreed prices, and this is permissible as per Shar ¯ı´ah rules.
Diminishing Musharakah in trade is conducted for the purpose of profit-earning; therefore,
the price of units of the financial institution cannot be fixed in the promise to purchase by
96 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clauses 5/4, 5/5, 5/6.


----- p.339 (pdf 367) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 339
the other partner (client) because it would practically mean that the client has guaranteed the
principal invested by the financier with or without profit. Therefore, the financial institution
either has to agree to sell the units of his ownership on the basis of valuation at the time
of the sale of each unit, or allow the client to sell these units to anybody else at whatever
price he can, but at the same time it would offer a specific price to the client, meaning
thereby that if he finds a purchaser of that unit at a higher price, he may sell it to him,
but if he wants to sell it to the financier, the latter will be agreeable to purchase it at the
price fixed by him beforehand. However, this does not seem to be feasible as it does not
serve the purpose of decreasing the equity in any business, as required under a Diminishing
Musharakah arrangement. Therefore, Diminishing Musharakah is feasible only in respect of
fixed or other assets that can be leased or given for use to the other partner. 97
12.9 DIMINISHING MUSHARAKAH AS AN ISLAMIC MODE OF
FINANCE
Diminishing Musharakah can be easily used for the purpose of financing fixed assets by
Islamic banks. It includes house financing, auto financing, plant and machinery financing,
factory/building financing and all other fixed asset financing. In the case of housing finance,
for example, a joint ownership is created for the purpose of Diminishing Musharakah. The
financier partner gives his undivided share on lease to the partner using the house. The client
gives rent on the part of the financier and periodically purchases the units of the partner’s
ownership.
The modus operandi approved by Shar ¯ı´ah scholars is that three contracts are entered
into separately, ensuring that each contract is independent of the other two contracts. The
sequencing of contracts should be:
1. A contract between partners to create a joint ownership. The client partner makes a
promise, before or after the lease agreement is finalized, to purchase the share of the
financier partner.
2. The financing partner gives units of his share to the client on lease.
3. The client partner goes on purchasing the units of ownership of the financing partner as
per his promise. Accordingly, the rent goes on decreasing.
Financing by a bank on the basis of Diminishing Musharakah can take different forms
depending upon the assets involved. Some assets can be leased out, e.g. in the case of house
financing and financing the purchase of plant and machinery. Assets of a commercial nature
would not involve leasing.
12.9.1 Diminishing Musharakah in Trade
If leasing is not involved and there is a simple partnership in which two partners start a
business, for example on a 40:60 basis, they can agree that the share units of one partner
will be periodically sold to the other partner, who will keep on purchasing them on a gradual
basis until the second party is out of the business. As this contract has been entered into for
profit-earning by the partners and also does not involve leasing, like the case of a house or
97 Usmani, 2000a, pp. 91, 92.


----- p.340 (pdf 368) -----


340 Understanding Islamic Finance
a vehicle, the price of share units cannot be fixed in the promise to sell. One partner may
agree to sell the units on the basis of valuation of the business at the time of the purchase of
each unit. Such valuation may be carried out in accordance with the recognized principles
by experts, whose identity may be agreed upon between the parties when the promise is
signed. At the time of purchase, the sale should be executed through offer and acceptance.
Although the entrepreneur partner in DM for trade has an inherent motivation to acquire
full ownership by purchasing shares from the financier, the Shar ¯ı´ah experts are not inclined
to make the purchase binding on him. According to Resolution No. 2 of the Jeddah-based
OIC Fiqh Academy, and also research undertaken by the IRTI, the sale provision of the
contract can be made binding only on the financier partner and the sale will be effected at
the prices prevailing in the market at the time of actual sale. After creating joint ownership,
the bank may sign a one-sided promise to sell different units of the share of its ownership
periodically and may undertake that when the client purchases a unit of its share, the rent
of the remaining units will be reduced accordingly. Thus, an Islamic bank will be making a
binding promise to offer a specific part of its ownership of the project for sale on a specified
future date for a price that will be determined at the time of actual sale. The entrepreneur
partner may voluntarily buy the share of the financier at the prices prevailing at the time of
sale in the stock market or at a price determined with the free consent of the parties.
12.9.2 Procedure and Documentation in Diminishing Musharakah
The following is the sequence of documentation in a typical Diminishing Musharakah
arrangement, as being used by Islamic financial institutions for housing finance business on
the basis of partnership by ownership:
1. Creation of joint ownership through a Musharakah agreement; the customer and the IFI
become co-owners in a joint property. If legal title to the property is already with the
customer, there can be an agreement to the effect that the IFI will acquire a certain share
in the Musha‘a property and this would involve a sale and lease-back arrangement.
2. Rent agreement. Both parties agree that the IFI will lease its undivided share to the client
partner against a stipulated rental to be governed under the rules of Ijarah. This agreement
is signed after the Musharakah agreement. It contains details about rent, the formula of
its calculation and a schedule for the period of lease.
3. Undertaking to purchase units of the bank’s share in the joint property. This is a unilateral
promise binding on the promisor only. Either the client or the bank can make this promise.
If the arrangement is based on Shirkatulmilk, it may contain a price schedule at which
the client has to purchase the units from time to time. It also gives details about the
situation if the client wants at any time, to purchase more shares than provided in the
mutually agreed schedule. The arrangement also contains details about the nature of
security/guarantee to be provided by the client. Normally it is the equitable mortgage
of the financed property. The bank may require additional security to secure its interest,
particularly in view of the financial position of the client.
Thus, the customer pays rent for the use of the bank’s share in the property and goes on
purchasing a part of the bank’s share periodically until the ownership of the asset is trans-
ferred to him. The facility can be provided for buying a house, building a house, renovation
of a house and for replacing interest-based housing loans with a Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant arrange-
ment (balance transfer facility). Other fixed assets can also be financed through Diminishing
Musharakah.


----- p.341 (pdf 369) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 341
Box 12.4: Construction of a House on a Customer’s Land or
Renovation of a House
Construction of a house on land owned by the customer would involve purchase/sale
and lease-back. Suppose the plot of land is worth one million dirhams and the cus-
tomer needs 800 000 Drs from the Islamic bank. The bank would purchase a part
of the land from the customer (say 8 units of 100 000 Drs each out of a total of
ten units) to form a joint ownership on the basis of Shirkatulmilk. The customer
would undertake that he would pay rent on the bank’s part of ownership and would
periodically purchase the share of the bank according to a pre-agreed schedule of
price.
With the proceeds of the land (800 000 Drs that could be provided in four equal
instalments), the client would construct the house; when the house was complete and
habitable, the bank would lease its part of ownership to the client at the agreed rental.
Up to one year, the client would pay only the rent on the bank’s part of the house.
Accordingly, the rent would not decrease during that period.
One year after the disbursement of the last instalment, the bank would start selling
its units of ownership to the client as per the undertaking of the customer; rent
would decrease with every rental paid, and ultimately the title of the house would
transfer to the client. The period of one year has been suggested by the Shar ¯ı´ah
scholars for sale of units by the bank to avoid buy-back (Bai‘ al ‘Inah), which is
prohibited.
Renovation of a house owned by the customer would also involve purchase/sale
and lease-back. The client would sell, say, four units of his ownership to the bank to
create a joint ownership. With the proceeds of the sale, the client would renovate the
house or make alterations to it. The bank would start taking rent from the first month
after disbursement of the first tranche because the customer is already living in the
house. The process of the units’ sale back to the client would start one year after the
disbursement of the last tranche.
Box 12.5: Hypothetical Case Study on Housing Finance Through
Diminishing Musharakah (Partnership by Ownership)
Calculation of the monthly payment plan for home purchase:
Cost of house: Drs or Ryls 1. 0 Mm
Bank financing: 80 %
Tenure: 10 years
Rental (return rate equivalent to) : 7 % p.a. (of investment)
Purpose: home purchase from the market


----- p.342 (pdf 370) -----


342 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 12.5: (Continued)
Key structure
Monthly payment consists of unit purchase and rent components. Unit purchase will
remain constant over the entire tenure. Rent is calculated based on the number of
units outstanding. The rent component will decrease every month with the purchase
of units.
(Construction of a house on a plot of land already owned by the client,
renovation/additions to a house owned by him or a balance transfer facility (BTF) for
the payment of an interest-based mortgage loan on a client’s house are subject to a
different procedure, as discussed in the previous Box.)
Working
Bank’s share: Ryls. 800 000; full payment is made in one tranche
Client’s share: Ryls. 200 000
No. of bank’s units (equal to number of months): 120
Price per unit: 6666.67
(Principal/number of units)
Rent per unit (annual): 466.67
[((outstanding investment ∗ rate) / 12) for monthly rent]
Month Unit Rent per
month
Total Units Investment
0 — — — 120 800 000.0
1 6666.67 4666.67 11 333.33 119 793 333.3
2 6666.67 4627.78 11 294.44 118 786 666.7
3 6666.67 4588.89 11 255.56 117 780 000.0
4 6666.67 4550.00 11 216.67 116 773 333.3
5 6666.67 4511.11 11 177.78 115 766 666.7
6 to 115 xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
116 6666.67 194.44 6861.11 4 26 666.7
117 6666.67 155.56 6822.22 3 20 000.0
118 6666.67 116.67 6783.33 2 13 333.3
119 6666.67 77.78 6744.44 1 6666.7
120 6666.67 38.89 6705.56 — 0.0
In all three above cases, i.e. the construction of a house, renovation of a house or purchase
of a built house, if the client regularly pays the rental and periodically purchases the bank’s
share, the ownership is transferred to him. If he delays, the rental will not decrease and the
bank’s loss in terms of income will be far less than in the case of Murabaha or even simple
leasing, as the customer will go on paying rental on the units owned by the bank.
The client can also purchase more than one unit if his cash flow allows him to do so.
In this case, Islamic banks normally conduct a valuation of the house and share in the
capital gain, if any, generally up to a prestipulated rate. For example, if the client intends
to purchase five units at one time, the bank will conduct a valuation and will share the


----- p.343 (pdf 371) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 343
appreciation up to 3 or 4 % on its part of the investment, giving the remainder to the client.
Thus, Diminishing Musharakah on the basis of Shirkatul milk has a built-in element of risk
mitigation. The rental rates to be taken by the banks can be fixed or floating; if floating,
they should be subject to a proper “floor and cap” to avoid Gharar, which could render the
transaction non-Shar¯ı´ah-compliant.
12.10 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
We may summarize the basic principles of Shirkah in the following way:
1. Of the various kinds of Shirkah used in the books of Islamic jurisprudence, Shirkah al
‘Inan is of more relevance to partnership business by banks and financial institutions.
There is a consensus of the jurists that Shirkah is not only a legitimate contract in Islam
but is also preferable over the modes based on trade and leasing. The term “Musharakah”
introduced by contemporary Shar ¯ı´ah scholars also means joint commercial enterprise
doing any economic activity by joint funds. 98
2. Capital to be invested by the partners can be unequal and should preferably be in the
nature of any prevalent currency. If it is in the shape of commodities, the market value
should be determined with mutual consent to determine the share of each partner for
sharing the profit or bearing the loss, if any. It may also be in the form of equal units
representing currency, called shares in the case of perpetual Musharakah and certificates
or Sukuk in the case of a redeemable partnership. The shares/Sukuk are negotiable and a
shareholder can sell his shares to anyone in the market. Obtaining formal consent about
the entry or exit of members into limited companies is not compulsory from an Islamic
point of view.
3. Power of appropriation in the property and participation in the affairs of the Musharakah
may be disproportionate to the capital invested by the partners.
4. In Musharakah (and also in Mudarabah), the ratio of profit distribution may differ from
the ratio of investment, but the loss must be divided exactly in accordance with the ratio
of capital invested by each of the partners.
5. It is not allowed to fix a lump sum amount of profit for any of the partners, or any rate
of profit tied up with his investment.
6. Scholars have approved the concept of “projected profit”, but this is subject to final
settlement at the end of the term, meaning that any amount so drawn by any partner
shall be treated as an “on-account payment” and will be adjusted to the actual profit he
may deserve at the end of the term.
7. If all the partners agree to work for the joint venture, each one of them shall be treated
as an agent of the other in all the matters of the business and any work done by one
of them in the normal course of business shall be deemed to be authorized by all the
partners. The partners may agree upon a condition that the management shall be carried
out by one of them, and no other partner shall work for the Musharakah. In this case, the
ratio of profit allocated to a sleeping partner shall not exceed the ratio of his investment.
8. In the case of running Shirkah business, the concept of “daily product” can be used for
determining the share of each partner in the profit accrued.
98 Usmani, 2000a, pp. 32, 33.


----- p.344 (pdf 372) -----


344 Understanding Islamic Finance
9. Musharakah or Mudarabah should never mean the advancing of money to get an ex ante
return. It means participation in the business and sharing the actual results in the form
of both profit and loss, subject to certain conditions.
10. A financier on the basis of Shirkah must share the loss incurred by the business to the
extent of his financing.
11. The loss suffered by each partner must be exactly in the proportion of his investment.
12. The basis of profit-sharing has to be defined beforehand without any pre-emptive right
to any of the parties.
Mudarabah is an essential mode for the establishment and operation of Islamic financial
institutions. It serves as a basis of business to be conducted by combining funds and the
expertise of different groups of people. For the assets side, however, Mudarabah is considered
to be a very high-risk financing activity, mainly due to the moral hazard, adverse selection
and lack of banks’ expertise in project evaluation and related technical matters. Islamic
banks may use Mudarabah, albeit with proper care and risk management, to finance the
business of those who are capable to work, whether they are professionals like physicians or
engineers or traders and craftsmen. It can also be used without much risk of loss in foreign
trade financing.
Musharakah can be used for foreign and inland trade financing, project financing directly
or through securitization.
Mudarabah Sukuk can be issued to mobilize funds and strengthen trading and industrial
activities. Asset management companies can manage such funds for conducting business
for their benefit, and also that of the Sukuk holders. This could generate higher rates of
return for the investors relative to the return realizable on any interest-based investment. In
the case of big projects, the IFIs may form a consortium to issue certificates to the public
for subscription. Similarly, they can carry out work on infrastructure and socio-economic
projects in coordination and partnership with engineering firms.
Box 12.6: Accounting Treatment of Mudarabah (Financing Side)
Recognition of Mudarabah capital at the time of
contracting
• recognize when paid to Mudarib or placed under his disposition;
• if capital is paid in instalments, each instalment is recognized when paid;
• presented as “Mudarabah financing”. If capital is provided in the form of nonmonetary
assets, it is reported as “nonmonetary assets”.
Measurement of Mudarabah capital at the time of contract
• capital provided in cash is measured by the amount paid or amount placed under the
disposition of the Mudarib;
• capital provided in kind is measured at fair value of the assets and any difference
between the fair value and the book value is recognized as profit or loss;
• expenses incurred are not considered part of the Mudarabah capital, unless otherwise
agreed by both parties.


----- p.345 (pdf 373) -----


Participatory Modes: Shirkah and its Variants 345
Measurement at the end of the financial period
• apply the same measurement criteria as used at the time of contracting, however,
any repayment made to the bank is to be deducted from the Mudarabah capital;
• any loss at the inception of work shall be borne by the Islamic bank and if the loss
occurs after the inception of work, it shall not affect the measurement of Mudarabah
capital;
• if the whole of the capital is lost without any misconduct or negligence of the
Mudarib, the Mudarabah shall be terminated and the Islamic bank shall recognize it
as loss;
• if the Mudarabah is terminated or liquidated and capital is not paid, it shall be
recognized as a receivable due from the Mudarib.
Recognition of the bank’s share in profits or losses
• profits or loss on Mudarabah transactions which commence and end during the same
financial period are recognized at the time of liquidation (constructive or actual);
• the Islamic bank’s share of profits on Mudarabah financing that continues for more
than one financial period is recognized to the extent of profit distribution and the
loss is deducted from the Mudarabah capital;
• share of profits is recognized as a receivable due from the Mudarib if he does not
pay after liquidation or settlement of account is made;
• losses are recognized at the time of liquidation by reducing the Mudarabah capital.
Box 12.7: Accounting Treatment of Musharakah 99
Recognition of the bank’s share in Musharakah capital at the time of the contract
• recognized when it is paid to the partner or made available to him on account of
Musharakah;
• presented as “Musharakah financing” in the financial statements.
Measurement of the bank’s share in Musharakah capital at the time of contracting
• capital provided in cash is measured by the amount paid or made available to the
partner on account of Musharakah;
• capital provided in kind is measured at fair value of the assets and any difference
between the fair value and the book value is recognized as profit or loss;
• expenses incurred are not to be considered part of Musharakah capital, unless other-
wise agreed by both parties.
99 The author is grateful to Mr Omer Mustafa Ansari of Fords Rhodes Sidat Hyder & Co., Karachi for his help in respect of the
accounting treatment in various modes of financing.


----- p.346 (pdf 374) -----


346 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 12.7: (Continued)
Measurement at the end of the financial period
• share in constant Musharakah capital is measured at historical cost;
• share in Diminishing Musharakah is measured at historical cost after deducting the
share transferred to the partner. Such transfer is made by sale at fair value (in DM
on Shirkah al ‘Aqd). The difference between the historical cost and the fair value is
recognized as profit or loss;
• if Diminishing Musharakah is liquidated before complete transfer is made to the
partner, the difference between the book value and the recovered amount is recognized
in the income statement of the bank;
• if Musharakah is terminated or liquidated, any amount that remains unpaid is recog-
nized as a receivable due from the partner.
Recognition of the Islamic bank’s share in profits or losses
• profits or loss on Musharakah transactions which commence and culminate during
the same financial period are recognized at the time of (constructive) liquidation;
• the Islamic bank’s share of profits on Musharakah financing that continues for more
than one financial period is recognized to the extent of profit distribution and share
of loss is deducted from the Musharakah capital;
• the treatment mentioned in the above point shall apply to a Diminishing Musharakah
after taking into consideration the decline in the Islamic bank’s share in Musharakah
capital and its profits or loss;
• share of profits is recognized as a receivable due from the partner if he does not pay
the Islamic bank’s due share of profits after liquidation or settlement of account is
made;
• loss incurred due to negligence or misconduct of the partner is recognized as a
receivable due from the partner.

