
----- p.347 (pdf 375) -----


13
Some Accessory Contracts
13.1 INTRODUCTION
Major contracts being used by Islamic financial institutions like Shirkah, Bai‘, Ijarah and
similar contracts have been discussed separately in various chapters. However, there are
some ancillary contracts that are used as part of the major contracts or could be used under
various modes. Out of these, two contracts, namely Wakalah (agency) and Ju‘alah (rendering
a service against reward), are discussed in this chapter. Tawarruq (monetization or generating
cash through purchase/sale activity) basically carries the concept of Murabaha in one way
or the other, but it has taken the form of a separate mode that Islamic banks use along
with some other major modes. Hence, it is also discussed in this chapter. Istijrar, a kind of
repeat sale that could take place under some major modes, has been discussed briefly. Other
subcontracts like Hawalah (assignment of debt), Kafalah (guarantee) and Bai‘ al Dayn (sale
of debt) have been discussed in the relevant chapters.
13.2 WAKALAH (AGENCY)
The literal meaning of “Wakalah” is looking after, taking custody or application of skill or
remedying on behalf of others. From this, the word “Tawkeel” is derived, which means to
appoint someone to take charge of something, and also to delegate any job to any other
person. Wakalah is also a responsibility. It is therefore necessary for a Wakil to discharge
his responsibility in the way a trustee discharges his responsibility in the case of Am ¯anah.
13.2.1 Types of Wakalah
• Wakil-bil-Kusoomah (to take up various disputes/cases on behalf of the principal);
• Wakil-bil-Taqazi al Dayn (receiving debt);
• Wakil-bil-Qabaza al Dayn (possession of debt);
• Wakil-bil-Bai‘ (agency for trading);
• Wakil-bil-Shira (agency for purchase).
Agency or delegated authority is proved by the texts of the Shar ¯ı´ah. The holy Prophet
(pbuh) himself delegated the job of purchasing a goat for him to a Companion named
‘Urwah al Barqi. 1 Similarly, the fourth Pious Caliph, Hadhrat Ali, and a number of other
Companions (Gbpwth) delegated their business to others.
1 Abu Daud, 1952, cf. Mansoori, 2005, p. 62.


----- p.348 (pdf 376) -----


348 Understanding Islamic Finance
The subject matter of agency or the act to be performed by the agent should be
known/defined. If the agency is for the purchase of a thing, the genus, kind, quality and
other necessary attributes of the commodity to be bought should be mentioned. Agency
is not permissible in acts prohibited in the Shar ¯i’ah or acts of disobedience such as theft,
usurpation of property or conducting Riba-based business.
An act to be carried out by an agent should be one that admits representation. Hence,
appointment of an agent for an act such as prayer, fasting, giving evidence or for taking an
oath is not permissible, because these acts should be performed by the principal himself.
An eyewitness to an incident, for instance, is required to give testimony himself. He is
not allowed to delegate this task to another person. Some of the acts for which the agency
contract can be invoked include sale and purchase, letting and hiring, borrowing and lend-
ing, assignment of debt, guarantee, pledge, gifts, bailment, taking and making payments,
marriage and divorce, litigation and relinquishment, admission and acknowledgement of
rights.
An agency contract may be specific or general. A bank, for example, may appoint an
agent to purchase some kinds of goods as and when asked by it. This will be a general
agency contract. If a bank asks an agent to sell his particular asset at a given price or as per
its instruction, it will be a specific agency contract. Even in a general contract, the nature of
job to be undertaken has to be clearly defined to avoid any disputes.
Delivery of the subject matter, claiming the price, exercise of the right of option of defect
or inspection and returning goods in the case of reclaiming and similar rights and liabilities
are attributed to the agent, who is responsible for making payment and receiving goods on
behalf of the principal. He would demand the price from the purchaser in case of sale. The
agent can be sued for not performing as per the agency agreement in the case of purchase
or sale. However, there are certain contracts which are attributed explicitly to the principal,
such as marriage, divorce and settlement of murder.
The agent must perform according to the instructions of the principal and exercise due care
and skill. He cannot entrust the job to another person without the consent of the principal.
He must also avoid conflicts of interest. Hence, for example, he cannot sell his own property
to the principal without fully disclosing that it belongs to him. Agency could generate third
party liabilities. Banks, while appointing an agent for the conduct of any business, should
take care of this aspect to ensure that the agent performs the function in good faith and
with due diligence, and the contract may contain a clause to make him liable in the case of
negligence on his part.
An action performed by an agent on behalf of the principal will be deemed an action by
the principal. According to the preferred juristic view, particularly of Shafi‘is and Hanbalis,
ownership of a commodity purchased by an agent for the principal will stand transferred
from the seller to the principal, without first entering into the ownership of the agent.
Sometimes jobs are undertaken without the proper authority of the principal. Such an unau-
thorized person is termed Fuduli in Islamic jurisprudence. There are two opinions regarding
the legal status of contracts concluded on behalf of another without proper authority. The
preferred view is that these are valid subject to ratification by the principal.
A Wakalah contract comes to an end by mutual agreement, unilateral termination,
discharging of obligation, destruction of the subject matter or death or loss of legal
capacity.
A Wakalah contract is used by Islamic financial institutions in respect of almost all
modes like Murabaha, Salam, Istisna‘a, Ijarah, Diminishing Musharakah and activities like


----- p.349 (pdf 377) -----


Some Accessory Contracts 349
L/C, payment and collection of bills, fund management and securitization. Wakalah may
be both commutative and noncommutative. Islamic banks mostly do not pay a fee to their
clients who purchase/sell goods on their behalf or perform other functions. However, banks
normally charge fees for agency services rendered by them on behalf of their clients.
Fund management on the basis of Wakalatul Istism ¯ar is one such example, wherein banks
charge a fixed fee remitting all profits/losses to the investors. We discuss this briefly
below.
13.2.2 Wakalatul Istism ¯ar
Islamic financial institutions can manage funds of investors on the basis of Wakalatul
Istism¯ar, meaning agency services for the management of the funds. For their services, banks
can get a pre-agreed fee irrespective of the profit or loss on the relevant portfolio. This fee
may be fixed in a lump sum or as a monthly or annual remuneration in percentage of the
amount of investment or the net asset value of the fund. For example, it may be agreed that
the management will get 2 % or 3 % of the net asset value of the fund at the end of every
financial year.
However, it is necessary to determine any one of the aforesaid methods before the launch
of the fund. The practical means of doing this would be to disclose in the prospectus of the
fund the basis on which the fees of the management will be paid. It is generally presumed
that whoever subscribes to the fund agrees with the terms mentioned in the prospectus.
Therefore, the manner of paying the management fee will be taken as agreed upon by all
the subscribers.
13.3 TAWARRUQ
Tawarruq means to buy on credit and sell at spot value with the objective of getting cash,
meaning that the transaction is not the need of the buyer; he simply wants liquidity, which
he gets by purchasing a commodity on credit and selling the same forthwith for cash. If he
sells to any third party, it is acceptable from the Shar ¯i‘ah point of view, but if he sells to the
person from whom he purchased on credit, it is not Shar ¯i‘ah compatible according to the
majority view. Despite being a grey area, Tawarruq is being used by many Islamic banks
for liquidity management and as a mode of financing, especially for personal financing and
credit cards.
In the traditional books of Islamic jurisprudence, Tawarruq has been discussed mainly by
the Hanbali and Shafi‘e jurists; but they also differentiate it from Bai‘ al ‘Inah. The difference
between ‘Inah and Tawarruq is that “Mutawarriq” (the person who acquires liquidity in this
way) sells the commodity to a third party, while in ‘Inah, the buyer resells it to the same
seller from whom he had bought the commodity with a difference in the sale and purchase
price.
The Hanbali and Shafi‘e jurists generally allow Tawarruq. There are two versions reported
from Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal about the permissibility of Tawarruq. The majority of the
Hanbali jurists have preferred the version according to which Tawarruq is permissible.
However, Ibn Taymiyah and Ibn Qayyim have held it as impermissible. Maliki jurists, who
are very strict about ‘Inah, do not see a major problem in Tawarruq. They consider it a way
to avoid Riba.


----- p.350 (pdf 378) -----


350 Understanding Islamic Finance
Some Hanafi jurists of later days have held that Tawarruq is ‘Inah, and hence abominable.
But the majority of the Hanafi jurists have preferred the view of Ibnul-Hummam that ‘Inah
is restricted to a situation where the commodity is sold back to the person from whom it
was purchased; if it is sold in the market, the transaction is valid and permissible. However,
Qardal Hasan (lending money without interest) is more preferable. Thus, the preferred view
in all the four schools of Islamic Fiqh is that Tawarruq is permissible. The AAOIFI has also
taken up the view that if a commodity is sold back, either directly or indirectly (through
any agent), to the original seller from whom it was purchased on a deferred payment basis,
this will be invalid, while if the commodity is sold to a third party, it is acceptable in the
Shar¯ı´ah.
This is the position with regard to the original concept of Tawarruq, but the ruling changes
if the transaction is infiltrated by some other elements. If a bank purchases a commodity
having brisk market and sells the same to the Mutawarriq, who sells it in the market, there
is no Shar ¯ı´ah problem. But, if the bank appoints the Mutawarriq its agent to purchase the
commodity on its behalf and then to sell the same to himself, the transaction will not be
valid, as the two transactions of purchase and sale are interdependent and the bank has not
taken the possession and the business risk. However, if the bank appoints him as an agent
only for the purchase of a commodity on behalf of the bank, then, once it is purchased, the
bank itself sells it to him through a separate contract with proper offer and acceptance, the
transaction is valid, but not advisable.
If a Mutawarriq appoints the bank his agent to sell a commodity that he would purchase
from the bank for Tawarruq in the market and this agency is stipulated in the contract of
sale as a condition, the transaction is not valid. However, if the agency was not a condition
in the sale contract and has been effected after unconditional sale, the transaction is valid,
but even then not advisable.
If Tawarruq is carried out through the national or international commodity exchange,
wherein only brokers are doing some agency services and the goods always remain where
they were without transfer of ownership from the seller to the buyer, it is vulnerable to
violation of Shar ¯ı´ah rules one way or another, because a number of conditions of a valid
sale may be lacking. Some Islamic banks are conducting Tawarruq by way of shares of joint
stock companies, Ijarah Sukuk (of tangible assets and also of services) and even “bundles of
assets”, comprising real assets as well as cash and receivables (the real assets being in the
majority in the bundle). Despite permissibility on legal grounds, use of such financing on
an extensive level needs to be avoided. The Shar ¯ı´ah scholars and experts in Islamic finance
advise that Tawarruq practice must be of limited use only for meeting unavoidable liquidity
needs of the corporate sector. “For individual consumers it must be completely out of the
Islamic banking practices,” says Monzer Kahf, a renowned scholar of Islamic economics and
finance.2 Nejatullah Siddiqi has observed in this regard: “The client approaches the Islamic
bank with a wish to have cash and a collateral and comes back with the desired cash after
signing a number of papers”. 3 This trend of wide and careless use of Tawarruq would create
systemic risk for the nascent finance industry. However, if all the conditions of a valid sale
are properly observed, the transaction may be valid, but even then its extensive use could
be problematic. 4
2 Kahf, 2004.
3 Siddiqi, 2006, pp. 15, 16.
4 For further details, see Obaidullah, n.d., pp. 109–111; http://islamiccenter.kau.edu.sa/english/publications/Obaidullah/ifs/ifs.html.


----- p.351 (pdf 379) -----


Some Accessory Contracts 351
13.3.1 Use of Tawarruq for Liquidity Management
Some Islamic banks use Tawarruq to place and obtain funds. It can give a fixed return
to the banks and, hence, it is widely used as Commodity Murabaha or Shares Murabaha
in the Middle East. Acceptable Tawarruq arrangements can be executed in the following
manner: one bank (in need of funds) and another bank (intends to place funds) select any
commodity/stocks which are liquid in nature (such as blue chip stocks); the surplus bank
purchases the commodity on cash payment from the market; the deficit bank purchases it
from the surplus bank on credit (Murabaha) and after taking delivery, sells it in the market
at spot price.
The Tawarruq process seems to be very simple. However, extreme care should be taken
while undertaking such transactions and it should be ensured that the transaction does not
become a mere exchange of papers between two brokers and one or two banks. Islamic
banks need to understand that Tawarruq arrangements should be used in extreme cases
where no option is available to avoid interest. Widespread use of such products is harmful
to the Islamic banking industry in the long run. Shar ¯ı´ah boards need to strictly monitor all
Tawarruq-based transactions.
13.4 JU‘ALAH
Ju‘alah is a contract in which one party (the J ¯a‘il) undertakes to give a specific reward
(the Jua‘l) to anyone who may be able to realize a specific or uncertain required result, for
example, finding a stolen car. Ju‘alah is permissible on the authority of the Holy Qur’ ¯an and
the Sunnah. There is reference in Surah Yousuf to the announcement about the lost beaker
of the King that the person who would find the beaker of the King would be given reward
of a camel load grain. 5 As regards the Sunnah, the holy Prophet (pbuh) approved a deal by
some Companions who stipulated that if the Chief of the tribe was cured, they would be
given compensation for that. Although some jurists restrict Ju‘alah to a reward for the return
of a runaway slave, the majority of them consider it permissible for a number of activities.
The determination of the required end result of the transaction is considered to be sufficient
to make it permissible. Ju‘alah is a relevant and useful transaction in events that cannot
be accomplished through Ijarah, such as bringing back a lost property from an uncertain
location, because the Ijarah contract requires that the work must be specified. Accordingly,
Ju‘alah may be used by Islamic banks for recovery of overdue debts and certain other
services whereby the subject of the required work cannot be minutely specified.
13.4.1 Parties to Ju‘alah
The two parties of Ju‘alah are the offeror and the worker; the former offers specified
compensation to anyone (the worker) who has to realize a determined result in a known or
unknown period. The worker may be any specified person(s) or the general public. In this
respect also, it is different from Ijarah. Realization of the end result is necessary in Ju‘alah
for payment of the compensation to the worker(s). In other words, if the worker, despite
his effort, is unable to realize the objective, he will not be entitled to any compensation for
5 Holy Qur’ ¯an, 10: 70–72.


----- p.352 (pdf 380) -----


352 Understanding Islamic Finance
his effort or time spent. Therefore, Ju‘alah is not affected by the uncertainty with respect to
the subject matter or the work to be done. This is why it is suitable for activities for which
Ijarah is not.
It is not a condition of Ju‘alah that the worker be specified and it is sufficient that an
offer is issued to the general public, in response to which any person can undertake the work
himself or with the help of others. However, if any worker is specified, then he himself will
have to undertake the work or he can involve others with the express consent of the offeror.
Ju‘alah is similar to agency, in which seeking help from others is valid.
Ju‘alah per se is not a binding contract. Parties in a Ju‘alah contract are entitled to
terminate the contract unilaterally. However, when the worker commences the work, it
becomes binding and if the offeror revokes in between, he will have to give a reasonable
wage to the worker. The basis for the entitlement of the worker to receive reasonable wages
when the contract is revoked after commencement of work is that the work done by the
worker is legally valid and loss is not to be caused to him. When the parties undertake not to
terminate the contract within a specified period, they must observe such an undertaking. If
the worker himself revokes the contract after commencing the work, he has no claim against
the offeror, unless they had agreed to the contrary.
The worker is considered a trustee as to the property of the offeror in his possession. As
such, he is not liable for any loss except in the case of negligence, misconduct or violation
of the stipulated conditions.
13.4.2 Subject Matter of Ju‘alah and Reward
The subject matter of Ju‘alah is the work required to be done and the compensation agreed
for the work. As Ju‘alah is a contract of exchange, it is necessary to indicate a task and
the reward. The task should not be a legal or an employment obligation upon the worker
and must involve some effort. The reward should be known and valuable, i.e. is permissible
consideration, and deliverable when required, so as to avoid any uncertainty when the result
is realized. The reward can also be a certain portion of the realized result.
If the work to be realized is determined, a Ju‘alah contract is valid, despite uncertainty
about the amount of work to be put in by the worker and the possibility of realization of
the result. Ju‘alah can be used for undertaking various activities like extraction of minerals,
finding any lost asset or property, collection of debts, getting any information for the benefit
of the offeror, such as presenting a report on any subject or the project or undertaking any
scientific invention, etc.
For example, governments may ask some firms for extraction of minerals with the condi-
tion that a specified amount of money will be given only to those who find any agreed-upon
mineral with specified features. Ju‘alah can also be used for collection of due but defaulted
debts, where the entitlement to compensation is contingent upon collection of agreed upon-
debts/receivables. Compensation in this case can also be related to the amount of realized
debts on a proportionate basis.
For innovations, scientific discoveries and designs such as trademarks, the entitlement to
compensation is contingent upon realization of the discovery or the accomplishment of the
stipulated job.
If Ju‘alah is used for brokerage activities, the entitlement to compensation will be contin-
gent upon completion or execution of the contract for which the brokerage service has been
sought.


----- p.353 (pdf 381) -----


Some Accessory Contracts 353
An offeror can specify a time for accomplishment of a job, after which the worker will
not be entitled to any reward except any stipulation or adjustment otherwise. For example,
parties can agree that if work on the job is at an advanced stage but remains incomplete due
to any genuine problem, the completion time may be increased with mutual consent.
13.4.3 Execution of a Ju‘alah Contract
Ju‘alah can be concluded by an open or informal offer to the public. In this case, any person
who hears or receives the offer and is interested to do the job may do so, either himself or
through the assistance of another person. However, if a Ju‘alah contract is concluded with
a specified worker, such a worker is obliged to perform the work himself.
Conclusion of a Ju‘alah contract does not require a counter acceptance by another party (as
is required in Ijarah), because the requirement of counter acceptance in Ju‘alah is practically
unattainable, except when it is concluded with a specific worker who is obliged to perform
the work himself.
As against Ijarah/Ujrah, the claim to the reward is not enforceable until the completion
of the required work. (In Ujrah, the worker who had agreed to work for a stipulated time
is entitled to a wage if he has worked for the settled time, irrespective of the work being
completed or not.) However, the worker is entitled to the reward prior to the completion of
the work in the following situations:
1. When it is found that the worker has worked to realize a result in respect of a property
that does not belong to the offeror and a legal decision to that effect has been issued.
2. When an accident that was not due to the negligence or misconduct of the worker causes
impairment of the value of the subject matter of the contract; here, the worker is entitled
to the full reward.
The worker is not entitled to a reward if Ju‘alah is terminated unilaterally by either party
before the commencement of work. However, when the contract is terminated by the offeror
after the work is commenced, the former is obliged to pay to the worker the common market
remuneration.
13.4.4 Parallel Ju‘alah Contracts
A bank, after taking work, can get it done by others on the basis of a Parallel Ju‘alah. The
two contracts will be independent of each other. The bank may play the role of the worker
by signing a Ju‘alah contract. It may carry out the work itself or through another parallel
contract with a third party, provided the first Ju‘alah contract does not require it to do the
work itself.
It is also possible for the bank to play the role of the offeror for performance, irrespective
of whether it needs the work for its own benefit or for the fulfilment of its obligation in a
Parallel Ju‘alah contract, taking into account that the two contracts remain independent.
13.4.5 Practical Process in Ju‘alah by Islamic Banks
Ju‘alah can be used by Islamic banks for a number of services, directly or through a Parallel
Ju‘alah contract with the following process (see Figure 13.1):
1. The customer negotiates with the bank for performance of uncertain work in a specified
time for an agreed reward.


----- p.354 (pdf 382) -----


354 Understanding Islamic Finance
2. The bank agrees to perform the work after conducting a cost versus benefit analysis, and
a Ju‘alah contract is entered into between the bank and the customer.
3. The bank finds a worker with the expertise to perform such uncertain work on his behalf
and a Parallel Ju‘alah contract is made with him.
4. The work is completed by the worker and an agreed wage or reward is paid to him by
the bank.
5. The bank collects its reward from the customer with whom the initial Ju‘alah contract
had been entered into.
Similarly, banks can take services from others on the basis of Ju‘alah. Recovery of
nonperforming debts is one such example.
Customer Worker
ISLAMIC
BANK
4
3
1
5Parallel
Ju´alah
contract 
Negotiation to perform an
uncertain work in specified
time
Receiving of
reward on
completion
of work  
xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxx
2
Ju´alah contract
Accomplishment of
work for an agreed
entitlement
Figure 13.1 The Ju‘alah process
13.4.6 Some Islamic Financial Products Based on Ju‘alah
Collection of Debts
Ju‘alah contracts can be used for collecting due debts where the entitlement to the reward is
related to realization of all or part of the debt. For example, a Ju‘alah contract for recovery
of debt is entered into between “A Bank” and “B Ltd”. The contract provides for the reward


----- p.355 (pdf 383) -----


Some Accessory Contracts 355
as a percentage of the amount collected on the basis of Ju‘alah. The reward can also be paid
in advance in full or in part, before completion of the work. However, in such a case, the
worker shall not be absolutely entitled to reward until the required result is realized and the
payment shall be made “on account” to him.
Securing Permissible Financing Facility
Ju‘alah contracts can be used to secure permissible financing, in which a worker is required
to do some form of service, like preparing of feasibility, that will make the bank agree to
provide the facility to the offeror.
Brokerage
Ju‘alah contracts may also be used in brokerage activities, where entitlement to reward is
attached to the signing of a contract which is intermediated by the broker.
13.5 BAI‘ AL ISTIJRAR (SUPPLY CONTRACT)
Istijrar is not a specific mode; it is rather a repeat sale/purchase arrangement of normal sale
in which a seller agrees to sell various amounts/units of a commodity from time to time.
The seller may also deliver the commodity agreed upon once in a number of consignments
and the price may be determined in advance, with every consignment or after the delivery
of all consignments.
The terms and conditions of repeat sale may be of any normal cash or credit sale. An
agreement may take place between the buyer and the supplier, whereby the supplier agrees
to supply a particular product on an ongoing basis, for example monthly, at an agreed price
and on the basis of an agreed mode of payment.
This is a modus operandi by which a master agreement is signed for financing on an
ongoing basis under any suitable normal modes. As it is a normal day-to-day business,
Shar¯ı´ah scholars give some relaxation on the matter of fixation and payment of price if
the arrangement does not involve Gharar. 6 Such types of arrangement take place between
wholesalers and retailers. Normally, the seller goes on delivering specified goods at the price
known to the buyer and the buyer makes payment on a monthly basis or as agreed between
them. A supplier of bread may go on supplying bread to a retailer for a month and may take
payment once after the month.
However, if any formal or informal contracts take place on the basis of any specific mode,
like Murabaha or Salam, their conditions and Shar ¯ı´ah essentials have to be fulfilled. In the
case of Murabaha, for example, separate offer and acceptance would be needed for every
consignment, based upon requisition of the client.
6 Obaidullah, n.d., pp. 101, 177.


----- p.356 (pdf 384) -----




