
----- p.357 (pdf 385) -----


14
Application of the System: Financing
Principles and Practices
14.1 INTRODUCTION
By now we have discussed the philosophy and features of Islamic finance, given an overview
of the products and financial services possible in the Islamic framework and also the
major modes that form the basis of Islamic financial products. Direct or indirect financial
intermediation by banking or non-banking institutions involves mobilization of resources
from the surplus units in an economy and their supply to the deficit units. The deposits
side of banks has been discussed in the necessary detail in Chapters 8 and 12. Some areas
of financing by Islamic banks have also been discussed in chapters on the basic modes;
but the investments or financing side needs detailed discussion in terms of the principles
underlying prudent Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant investment practices and some specific areas of
financing, enabling readers to fully understand the functioning of Islamic banking and
finance. In the present chapter we shall discuss the principles governing Islamic financing
and how these can be implemented for proper functioning of the system.
Prudent financing requires vigorous product development and implementation along with
prudence, proper risk management and Shar ¯ı´ah compliance. It is pertinent to observe that
“money earning money” does not fit into the Islamic structure; money has to be invested in
goods that may yield profit on the basis of risk/liability-taking and value addition. Islamic
banks have to conduct business in a win–win scenario, just like any other business, while
avoiding non-Shar¯ı´ah compliant elements like interest, Gharar, gambling and other unethical
practices. For this purpose, they have to design instruments and diversified investment
portfolios that may generate profit with sufficient liquidity to fulfil the expectations and
demands of the depositors. To maximize profits, they need to look for investments that yield
the highest return, minimize risks and provide adequate liquidity, albeit keeping in mind the
business ethics prescribed by the Shar ¯ı´ah.
The Islamic banking and finance industry is facing a number of challenges. The biggest
challenge is to develop products of investment and financing which not only are in accordance
with the Shar ¯ı´ah principles but also meet the ever-growing and changing needs of trade,
business and industry, both in the private and public sectors. Only this way can they meet the
challenge of confidence-building and enhancing the integrity of Islamic financial institutions.
Innovation is the most critical success factor in the current financial era. A Shar ¯ı´ah
inspired and compliant product innovation process is different from the conventional product
development process, as it has to follow the additional parameters of conformity with
Shar¯ı´ah tenets. It requires common efforts of the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars and the bankers.


----- p.358 (pdf 386) -----


358 Understanding Islamic Finance
14.2 PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
Product development means creating business, suggesting means to it, keeping in mind
the realities and business prospects for the future. Product development with reference to
Islamic finance refers to the process of developing assets, through innovation and research,
in the form of products and services to cater to the customers’ demands in the most suitable
way within the parameters of Shar ¯ı´ah and the governing regulatory and legal boundaries.
It also includes re-engineering of existing products in accordance with Islamic economic
principles and the changing requirements of businesses. It helps banks to create more business
opportunities and provides a competitive advantage over other market players. Effective
product development creates synergy between the customers and the bank and thus assists
the bank in better understanding the needs of its customers. A satisfied customer is often a
repeat customer and tends to enhance the credibility of the bank.
14.2.1 Procedure for Product Development
Product development requires assessment of need, generation of ideas, discussion with the
Shar¯ı´ah advisor/board for deciding detailed procedures for the operation and implementation
of the product, development of the procedures (preparation of an operational manual for
guidance of staff members) and the final approval by the Shar ¯ı´ah department of the bank.
All possible risks have to be carefully analysed and risk mitigants devised to manage the
risks. The Risk Management Division should also be involved to take into account the
operational, asset-related and credit risks, accounting, taxation, regulatory and legal issues at
the stage of product development. Deciding factors in this regard are: market survey; Shar ¯ı´ah
compliance (in terms of mode, nature of assets involved, process and documentation); risk
profile of depositors; cash flow of clients on the assets side; risk mitigation measures; legal
matters and managing mismatch – liquidity versus profitability.
The product manual has to be discussed with the operations staff to ensure the smooth
operation of the product in accordance with recognized procedures.
IT support is an integral part of today’s business and needs to be properly worked out.
Training of marketing and operational personnel is necessary before launching and imple-
menting the product. They must know the salient features of the product and, more specifi-
cally, its advantages over other available products in the market.
Launching the product is the start of another process, i.e. revision and modification of
the product’s features. In the light of the feedback, the product features may be modified to
cater to the customers’ requirements in a more effective manner.
A product may involve more than one mode to cater to the needs of the business in
a Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant and efficient manner. For example, a housing finance product based
on Diminishing Musharakah may comprise the concepts of Shirkah, Ijarah, Istisna‘a and
Wakalah. Product developers have to observe the rules of all the related modes.
14.3 THE NATURE OF FINANCIAL SERVICES/BUSINESS
The major players in the finance industry include Islamic commercial banks, Islamic invest-
ment banks and other non-banking Islamic financial institutions, Islamic funds and unit
trusts, equity and debt market players, pilgrimage funds and other cooperative institutions
and Takaful companies. The regulatory framework for these institutions is different in


----- p.359 (pdf 387) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 359
different countries. While banks and non-banking institutions like investment banks are
managed mostly by the central banks, equity and debt market businesses, funds, unit trusts,
venture capital, etc. are governed by the Securities and Exchange Commissions in respec-
tive jurisdictions. But there may be some slight differences in regulatory set-up in various
jurisdictions.
Islamic financial institutions (IFIs) obtain funds from a number of sources, which include:
shareholders’ equity, customers’ general or investment deposits, inter-bank borrowings and,
in some cases, the central banks. The bases for mobilization of funds are Mudarabah and
Wakalatul Istism ¯ar (agency). Unrestricted or restricted investment deposits are based on the
principle of Shirkah, while current accounts are normally kept as loans and are not entitled
to any return.
14.3.1 Management of Deposit Pools and Investments
For the purpose of investment of funds, IFIs maintain common and separate pools or gen-
eral and individual portfolios. The volume of investment deposits determines the banks’
investment strategies. If depositors are risk-averse, banks should also be risk-averse, invest-
ing in less risky modes and avenues. Keeping in mind the depositors’ risk profiles,
profitability and liquidity, they should invest through PLS modes in high-risk ventures
and through debt-creating modes in low-risk investments. They should also deploy funds
in financial markets and make fee-based earnings through investment management and
services.
The financing assets of Islamic banks are grouped into different investment pools with
respect to the source of funds. The funds and financing assets can be allocated to the
following investment pools:
• general deposit pools (domestic or foreign currencies);
• central bank’s refinance scheme pools (like the Islamic export refinance scheme of the
State Bank of Pakistan);
• treasury/financial institutions pool;
• equity pool;
• specific customers’ pools.
The above pools are managed at the Head Offices or the Area Offices of the banks.
The internal auditor and/or Shar ¯ı´ah advisor have to take the following steps to ensure
the Shar ¯ı´ah compliance of deposit management with respect to investments by an Islamic
bank:
• Distinguish between various kinds of deposits offered by the bank under various
schemes and to see that proper ratios for sharing profits/losses have been given and
weightages assigned based on the tenors of deposits and disclosed to the deposi-
tors; assigning different weightages on the basis of size of accounts of the same
tenor, although permissible with proper disclosure to all depositors, has to be gener-
ally discouraged, as it may lead to favouritism and injustice. It should also be ensured
that the profit is allocated using the concept of daily product and the weightages
system.
• Ensure that the bank has not assured any fixed return to any individuals or group
of depositors; if any projected rates have been quoted, the same must be subject to


----- p.360 (pdf 388) -----


360 Understanding Islamic Finance
adjustments on the basis of actual performance of the relevant general or restricted
pools of deposits. For example, an Islamic bank can tell any corporate client that it will
invest its deposit in Ijarah and Murabaha activities, upon which it will be earning fixed
return/rentals. But as there could be some defaults, and hence a loss of cost of funds to
the bank, and the bank may also have to incur some ownership-related expenses in leases,
it might not be possible to give any pre-fixed return; Shar ¯ı´ah auditors should ensure that
all such issues have been properly taken care of in respect of all pools maintained by the
bank. In the case of large numbers of pools, they may take up a sampling method. They
may like to obtain the bank’s correspondence with high-valued accounts to ensure that
no fixed return is committed with them.
• Auditors may also select a sample of transactions booked under various pools and obtain
their respective agreements to check that the documentation and agreements approved for
various activities have been used or there are some deviations.
• It must also be ensured that the bank is performing its fiduciary responsibility as a
Mudarib and Rabbul-m ¯al in cases where the deposits are kept on a Shirkah basis
and agency-related responsibilities in cases where deposits are based on a Wakalatul
Istism¯ar basis. Any remunerative deposits should not be taken as loans by the
bank.
• If the bank’s own funds are also invested with those of the depositors in various pools, it
should be ensured that the profits earned during the period have been distributed between
the bank and depositors and among the depositors as per the agreed terms. After the
distribution of the profit is made between the bank and the pools, the bank can donate a
part of its own profit to any pool, provided it is not pre-agreed with the depositors/pool
members.
14.3.2 Selection of the Mode for Financing
The deployment of funds is still a major issue for IFIs as they do not have vanilla products
available for meeting the needs of their customers. Islamic banks need to focus on the modes
which best suit the requirements of the customers. Once a customer approaches the bank,
they need to evaluate his requirements and offer the best possible product. Using Murabaha
or Ijarah for every kind of need is neither feasible nor advisable.
For example, Murabaha is not the right mode to provide financing for the purchase of
sugar cane. Similarly, it may not be feasible for housing or other longer term investments in
economies with high rates of inflation. Ijarah may not be feasible for projects entailing asset,
market and counterparty risks, particularly for longer term project financing. In addition,
Murabaha and Ijarah may not give better profit margins for the banks. Therefore, Islamic
banks need to evaluate the flexibilities available in other modes of finance. Diversification
is the best strategy for any bank – Islamic or conventional. It helps them in providing better
customer service and earning better profit margins. A quick overview of the basic business
features of Islamic modes of finance is given below:
• Murabaha: Islamic banks purchase the goods and sell them on a profit margin; banks
have to take ownership-related risks until the goods are sold to the customer; the asset
risk is transferred to the client upon execution of Murabaha; there is less risk and a fixed
return; normally for short-term financing.


----- p.361 (pdf 389) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 361
• Ijarah: Islamic banks purchase nonconsumable assets and give them on lease, getting risk
and reward of the ownership of the assets; conducive to the formation of fixed assets
and medium- and long-term investments; the bank is an “accumulator” (if it keeps the
assets in its ownership) or “distributor” (if it transfers the ownership and risks through
securitization); return can be fixed or floating but asset-related risks remain with the bank
until the termination of Ijarah. Ijarah is most suitable for financing the public sector and
big corporations, provided they have unencumbered useable assets, and this is possible
through the issuance of Ijarah certificates and Sukuk.
• Salam: a forward sale with prepayment in full; fulfils the seller’s needs by providing
him funds that he may use anywhere and offers the buyer a profitable business asset.
It has vast potential, particularly in agriculture, agro-based industries and financing of
overhead expenses of trade and industry; can be used for short- and, in selected cases,
for medium-term financing.
• Istisna‘a: also a forward sale with an order to manufacture or construct an asset with
given specifications. It has the flexibility of payment of price, which can be immediate,
deferred or in instalments. As manufacturing or construction also depends on the personal
effort and commitment of the seller/manufacturer, Istisna‘a has an additional flexibility
for controlling any delay in delivery of the asset by the seller.
• Musharakah/Mudarabah: particularly suitable for consignment-based trade transactions,
for short-, medium- and long-term project financing, import financing, preshipment
export financing and working capital financing. Project financing can be conducted under
Musharakah through the issuance of TFCs or Sukuk.
• Diminishing Musharakah: for financing of fixed assets like houses, motor vehicles,
machinery, etc. In particular, it is suitable for financing the purchase, construction and
renovation of houses and commercial buildings. It may also involve “sale and lease-
back” arrangements in cases where the property is already in the ownership of the
customer.
Box 14.1: Salient Features of Major Modes of Financing
Features Diminishing
Musharakah
Ijarah Murabaha
Period Long-term Long-term Short/long-term
Rate Fixed/variable Fixed/variable Fixed
Prepayment allowed Yes Yes Not allowed as a
system
Risk of the asset Joint Financier Financier/customer
Uses Nonconsumable
assets
Nonconsumable
assets
Any Halal assets
Late payments Controllable Controllable Loss to the bank


----- p.362 (pdf 390) -----


362 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 14.1: (Continued)
Features Salam Istisna‘a Musharakah/
Mudarabah
Period Short-term Short/long-term Short/long-term
Rate Fixed Fixed Variable
Prepayment allowed No May be structured Yes
Risk of the asset Financier/customer Customer/financier Joint
Uses Salam compatible Assets to be
manufactured
Any Halal
business
Late payments Loss to the bank Controllable No issue
Box 14.2: Example of Using Salam and Murabaha Combined
An Islamic bank can purchase cotton on the basis of Salam from growers while
operating in the agricultural finance sector. In order to sell the cotton, it can take
promise from a textile mill that it will purchase the cotton against an agreed price.
Once the cotton is ready for delivery, the bank may appoint the textile mill its agent
to take delivery of the cotton from the grower. When the mill informs the bank that
it has taken delivery, the bank may sell the same to the mill (the promisor) for the
already agreed price under a Murabaha transaction.
The product is beneficial to the farmer as he gets cash for the future produce
and manages the risk of a fall in price or his inability to market the cotton at the
harvest time.
The product is beneficial to the bank for the following reasons: funds are deployed
for an extended tenure, with exposure on two different customers in different sectors;
thus, risk is minimized. In a Salam transaction, a bank may end up with inventory,
which creates problems for the bank. However, under the proposed structure, all
problems related to inventory will be resolved. If structured properly, the bank can
earn a better margin on the transaction.
The product is also beneficial to the textile mill as the mill can shield itself from
price fluctuation in the cotton season. It is a hedging mechanism for the mill.
14.3.3 Tenor of Financing
Analysis of the cash flow of the customer is extremely important in Islamic banking for
deciding the tenor of financing for any client. In conventional banking, bankers and customers
focus on interest rates and obtain financing even in scenarios where the cash flows of the
project mismatch with the repayment capacity. The customers believe that they will manage
it through rollovers and other related facilities. Although this approach is not considered
prudent, even according to the rules of conventional finance, it can work in individual cases.


----- p.363 (pdf 391) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 363
It is, on the other hand, suicidal in Islamic finance, mainly because an Islamic bank cannot
claim any liquidated damages against the loss of the cost of funds in cases of default. If the
situation is not managed properly, the bank will face problems in payments by its customers.
Therefore, the tenor of any financing facility must be determined carefully in consultation
with the customer.
14.3.4 Shar ¯ı´ah Compliance and Internal Shar ¯ı´ah Controls
Ensuring Shar ¯ı´ah compliance is the most important job in Islamic banking. Any failure
in this regard may cause systemic risk for Islamic banking and income loss for any bank.
Audit should be conducted with regular intervals to ensure Shar ¯ı´ah compliance. Internal
auditors have to identify gaps in the process of financing and the operations department has
to refine and amend the products and the procedures. Shar ¯ı´ah compliance guidelines should
be issued in specific formats with each product programme so that the Shar ¯ı´ah audit may
be carried out systematically. The product developers and implementers should adopt the
policy of learning and improving from mistakes. Another purpose of the audit should be the
education of staff members.
Shar¯ı´ah boards of the banks have to play a crucial role in this regard. They should be
in a position to offer recommendations as to how to amend the proposed structure of any
product in order to make it feasible and Shar ¯ı´ah-compatible. They should finalize the model
documents and agreements for the modes of financing and try to ensure that banks follow
them in all their transactions, in letter and spirit. Whenever a situation arises where there
are difficulties in applying any of the formats, the management should bring the problem to
the notice of its Shar ¯ı´ah board to resolve the related issues.
The personnel of Islamic banks have often been trained in conventional banking and
are not familiar with Islamic banking. As Islamic banking is still in a process of evo-
lution, even the senior management may not be experienced or up to date in the latest
applications of the Shar ¯ı´ah principles. Quite unintentionally, they may fail to carry out
their Shar¯ı´ah board’s resolutions. For this reason, the board may like to inspect the bank’s
transactions in detail and give advice as to where they could be improved for compatibil-
ity with the Islamic principles. This would not only ensure that the bank is operating in
accordance with Islamic law, but would also give the Shar ¯ı´ah board itself an opportunity
of gaining a deeper insight into the practical problems that arise. In addition, both the staff
and the management would be given an opportunity to enhance their understanding and
competence.
Similarly, a large part of Islamic banks’ assets may comprise investments in equities/capital
markets. Shar ¯ı´ah boards must ensure the compliance of criteria for Islamic banks’ invest-
ments in shares, equities, Sukuk and other avenues of business. This aspect of Shar ¯ı´ah
control should include prohibition of investment in companies with unacceptable business
lines, which produce prohibited products and provide prohibited services like:
• alcoholic beverages and tobacco products;
• grocery stores dealing in Haram goods;
• restaurants, casinos and hotels with bars for prohibited activities;
• amusement and recreational services likely to involve indecent activities;
• financial institutions which deal with interest;
• companies of which:


----- p.364 (pdf 392) -----


364 Understanding Islamic Finance
— the interest income ratio is more than (5) %;
— the debt ratio (leverage) is more than (10–33) %;
— total illiquid assets are less than 10–33 % of its total assets.
If investment is made in the equity of such companies, Haram or interest-related income
will have to be given to charity and the Shar ¯ı´ah boards must ensure its credit to the Charity
Account.
The major functions of a Shar ¯ı´ah supervisory board in the light of the AAOIFI’s Shar ¯ı´ah
Standard are given in the appendix to this chapter.
Shar¯ı´ah Controls in Respect of Various Modes
In order to ensure Shar ¯ı´ah compliance, Shar ¯ı´ah boards should specify certain controls
for modes which respective banks are using, particularly in respect of commonly used
products like Murabaha and Ijarah, which are susceptible to being used as back doors to
interest. Murabaha in various goods may involve different aspects needing close monitoring,
for example, Murabaha in perishable goods, shares of joint stock companies, particularly
when the transactions involve dual side agency agreements (the client is appointed agent to
purchase the asset on behalf of the bank and also given funds for payment to the supplier),
Tawarruq and other by-products of major Islamic modes. We outline internal controls in
respect of some commonly used modes below.
Murabaha – Internal Shar ¯ı´ah Controls
1. The Internal Control Department/Shar ¯ı´ah Board should ensure that accounting in
Murabaha is made similar to that of a trade transaction instead of a financial transaction.
In this respect, the AAOIFI’s Accounting Standard on Murabaha may be consulted or
there could be adaptation keeping in mind the international accounting standards and the
local business practices. Some banks record only the disbursement of the total amount
including mark-up. This is against the substance of Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant Murabaha.
2. To ensure that banks are not involved in rollover of Murabaha transactions, strict internal
controls should be applied. The price of the goods cannot be changed if the customer
does not pay on time. Accordingly, there is no prospect for a rollover of Murabaha
transactions. Nevertheless, it should also be kept in mind that a master Murabaha facility
that a bank approves for a client as MoU, entails multiple Murabaha transactions, and if
it is necessary to extend credit, a new Murabaha should be initiated against new goods
with a fresh offer and acceptance and complete process of trade. However, some banks
resort to arrangements in which they disburse the amount payable by their client against a
new but fictitious Murabaha (only book entries), credit the amount to the client’s account
and then debit his account against the old Murabaha. In some cases, banks might not be
making even the book entry for the new Murabaha and there might be simple rollover
of the previous Murabaha, including the previous receivables plus mark-up for the new
term. Shar ¯ı´ah boards will have to restrict the banks from such operations. Return on
such rollovers must go to the Charity Account.
3. The client who is being paid an amount for purchase of the commodity on behalf of the
bank may not purchase the commodity for a long time and use the funds for arbitrage or
any other asset that might not be permissible, e.g. for purchase of interest-based securities
or shares in interest-based companies. Therefore, it has to be ensured that the client


----- p.365 (pdf 393) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 365
purchases the commodity within a given maximum time and gives declaration to the bank.
It may also be indicated in the agency agreement that the given funds are an Am ¯anah and
their use for any unauthorized purpose is not allowed by Shar ¯ı´ah. The Shar ¯ı´ah board
may also advise the bank to make payment directly to the supplier.
4. It also has to be ensured that the goods purchased by the client in Murabaha to Purchase
Orderer exist at the time of offer and acceptance – i.e. have not been consumed by the
client in his production cycle. For this purpose, the bank should identify the time within
which declaration has to be made by the client in respect of various goods.
5. Although legal title is not necessary from a Shar ¯ı´ah point of view and simple transfer
of ownership transfers the risk and reward to the buyer, for genuine Murabaha, it is
recommended that the title of ownership is transferred to the bank in the form of any
documentary evidence. But banks, in order to avoid payment of transfer charges, purchase
the goods in the name of the client; thus, they do not become owner of the goods in any
way. A Shar ¯ı´ah board must ensure that not only is the title of goods in the name of
the bank at the time of sale to the client, but also the bank retains all risks and rewards
related to ownership until the goods are sold to the client. This reduces the chances of
making the Murabaha a back door to interest.
6. It must also be ensured that all documentation requirements, particularly if the client is
also an agent of the bank, are being fulfilled properly. The board should not allow any
change in the format of the master Murabaha agreement without its prior approval.
7. Mark-up should be charged from the time when the bank sells the commodity on credit
to the client and not from the date of disbursement of funds to the supplier or to the client
(as agent). Any part of the mark-up should not be referable to the intervening period,
i.e. between disbursement and declaration/acceptance by the bank. Hence, Islamic banks
should calculate their Murabaha profit from the date they sell the commodity to the client.
However, they may apply any rate in consultation with the customers.
8. A Shar ¯ı´ah board should put in place effective controls to ensure that banks do not resort
to buy-back techniques in the case of Murabaha transactions. The companies from which
goods are being purchased for sale on a Murabaha basis should not be the sister concerns
of the customer’s company, i.e. the customer’s share in ownership of such companies
should not be more than 50 %.
9. Banks, upon financing, normally take demand promissory notes (DP notes) from the
client. As Islamic banks’ financing is based on the underlying trading/leasing contracts,
they should get DP notes only after executing the Murabaha sale and creation of liability,
e.g. after the sale of goods. If such a note is necessary at the time of disbursement for
the sake of security, it can be of the principal amount only, i.e. excluding the mark-up or
profit margin.
Auditors have also to look into the overall or master agreement, a kind of MoU, between
the bank and the purchaser/customer, whereby the bank promises to sell or the purchaser
promises to buy the commodity from time to time on an agreed rate of profit added to
the cost.
Some Shar¯ı´ah boards have also allowed in the Murabaha structure the use of Tawarruq,
i.e. the client selling the goods in the market purchased from the bank to get cash for
any consumption or business activity. In this case, the Shar ¯ı´ah board must ensure that the
process of genuine Murabaha is completed, fulfilling the Shar ¯ı´ah essentials, and that the
cash realized by the client is intended for any Halal business/purpose.


----- p.366 (pdf 394) -----


366 Understanding Islamic Finance
With regard to documentation in Murabaha, the auditor should ensure that the bank has
received proper invoices for the goods and has taken delivery of the assets either by itself or
through an agent authorized for this purpose. The date on invoices must not be later than the
date of declaration by the client serving as agent. Sale is concluded when the bank accepts
the offer, whereby the ownership, as well as the risk relating to the asset, is transferred to
the customer.
Ijarah – Internal Shar ¯ı´ah Controls
The other major mode Islamic banks are using is Ijarah, along with its variants like the
leasing part of Diminishing Musharakah in financing of fixed durable assets. The following
may be some of its controls:
1. The Shar ¯ı´ah board should ensure that ownership title of the leased asset is transferred to
the bank, i.e. the lessor. If it involves import, the bank should import in its name directly
or through an agent/client. It has been observed that to avoid some taxes/charges, assets
are imported in the name of the client/lessee. This is not advisable and the minimum that
should be ensured is that a “counter deed” should be signed between the bank (lessor)
and the client (lessee) for transfer of the ownership to the lessor.
2. If an identified asset is to be leased, e.g. a 2007 model Toyota car manufactured by
company ‘ABC’, it must be ensured that the bank acquires the ownership before entering
into an actual Ijarah agreement. Prior to that it would only be a “promise to lease”.
3. The Ijarah asset, the lease period and the rental must be defined properly. It also needs
to be seen that the intended use of the asset is permissible.
4. In situations where a floating rental is stipulated, the first rental should be specified and
then a certain benchmark applied for determination of future rental along with a proper
floor and cap. In addition, rental for the subsequent period should be agreed in absolute
value before the start of the period.
5. It has to be ensured that conventional insurance is not taken, particularly when Takaful
is available.
6. Ijarah and Bai‘ are entirely different types of transactions in terms of their implications
for the parties involved. Therefore, the two transactions should not be mixed in such
a way that their respective Shar ¯ı´ah essentials are not fulfilled. Transfer of ownership
to the lessee should not be an integral condition of the lease agreement. It could be a
unilateral undertaking or promise, not binding on the other party. A separate contract
has to be entered into for transfer of ownership of the asset to the client at the end of
the lease term.
7. A Shar ¯ı´ah board should ensure that expenses relating to purchase and ownership of the
asset are borne by the bank. As such, expenses that are necessary to maintain the overall
corpus of the asset are the lessor’s responsibility.
8. As per the AAOIFI’s Accounting Standard for Ijarah, accounting for Ijarah-based financ-
ing should be similar to that of operating lease and not that of finance lease.
9. It should be ensured that if rental is received in advance, the same cannot be treated
as bank’s income, even if an accounting period is lapsed. An auditor should check the
delivery orders to ensure that the asset had been delivered at the time of commencement
of the lease period and accrual of the rent.
10. Any penalty received by the bank in cases of default or late payment of lease rentals
should be given to charity, as approved by the Shar ¯ı´ah board.


----- p.367 (pdf 395) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 367
Other Modes – Internal Shar ¯ı´ah Controls
Similarly, for all other modes which an Islamic bank is using, a Shar ¯ı´ah board should
identify the minimum controls which must be ensured so as to maintain the sanctity of
Islamic business products. For example, in Diminishing Musharakah, different documents
relating to the creation of partnership, leasing and sale of units to the other party must be
independently enforceable. All expenses relating to ownership must be borne by the parties
in the proportion of their ownership. If a jointly purchased asset is not capable of being
leased (like an open plot of land), it cannot be leased to charge rental, because it is only a
commercial asset and can give profit only upon its sale. If commercial assets are involved,
the nature of the partnership will be that of Shirkatul‘aqd and the units may be sold only
at market or agreed-upon value at the time of sale. Similarly, they can be revalued only
keeping in mind their actual value, and if it is prestipulated that units will be revalued
by ( )% per month/annum, without regard to the actual value, the transaction will become
usurious.
In the case of Musharakah agreements for financing, profit rates are projected in the
agreements with the customers on the assets side. The Shar¯ı´ah department will need to ensure
that payments to banks under projected rates are subject to an approved final adjustment
procedure. Treatment of loss, if any, by the bank management is also crucial and it must be
ensured that loss is borne by the partners in proportion of their share in the joint investment.
Further, investments in shares of joint stock companies should be subject to the screening
criteria approved by the Shar ¯ı´ah board and in the case of any non-compliance, the dividend
income or the capital gain from non-Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant investments must go to the Charity
Account.
An Islamic bank’s placements with other institutions should be only on any of the Shar ¯ı´ah-
compliant bases and any income from non-Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant placements must go to charity.
It should also be ensured that the bank fulfils the necessary disclosure requirements and
profits are distributed among shareholders and various categories of depositors according to
the already disclosed criteria/ratios/weightages.
Finally, the use of charity fund proceeds has to be overseen by the Shar ¯ı´ah board.
Generally, it is left to Islamic banks themselves as to whom and how they disburse such
funds. However, if regulators in respective countries do not advise any procedure/avenues
for disbursement of charity funds, Shar ¯ı´ah boards must ensure that these are used for the
uplift of the poor or for social welfare projects in the respective economies/societies and are
not used for any other purpose not conforming to the Shar ¯ı´ah tenets.
14.3.5 Operational Controls
Islamic banks’ assets are normally risk-based. They may finance projects on the basis of
equity participation and profit-sharing in addition to debt-based modes of trade and leasing.
Therefore, the soundness of their operations needs a type of control that goes beyond merely
ensuring the solvency of debtors. To ascertain operational soundness, the regulators need to
undertake the following procedures:
1. The application of consolidated and acceptable accounting standards suitable for Islamic
modes of financing.
2. A review of project financing operations to ensure soundness of the bank’s performance
in preparing feasibility studies and evaluations and follow-ups on project implementation.


----- p.368 (pdf 396) -----


368 Understanding Islamic Finance
3. An evaluation of the performance of the bank in monitoring and controlling the enterprises
it finances by way of equity participation. This would also include looking into the
ability of the bank to deal with the problems facing enterprises, and providing them with
necessary technical assistance.
Structural Issues
1. It is better that each and every aspect of the transaction structure is clarified by the
Shar¯ı´ah board.
2. It may also happen in Islamic banking that a slight change in process flow may lead to
transfer to charity of the whole income due to non-Shar ¯ı´ah-compliance. Therefore, all
issues related to the structure of the transaction/product should be clarified beforehand
with the Shar ¯ı´ah advisor/Shar¯ı´ah board.
3. As IFIs have to deal in goods and tangible assets, they may suitably change their business
structure, enabling them to fulfil the requirements of the Shar ¯ı´ah.
Asymmetric Risk and Moral Hazard Issues
1. Asymmetric risk arises from information asymmetry, which occurs when one party to a
transaction has more or better information than the other party – also called asymmetrical
information.
2. Moral hazard is the name given to the increased risk of problematical (immoral) behaviour,
and thus a negative outcome because the person who caused the problem doesn’t suffer
the full (or any) consequences, or may actually benefit. Such a concern typically arises
in the context of contracts like Takaful of the financed assets.
3. As discussed earlier, Islamic modes of finance give certain rights/liabilities to both parties.
Bankers need to understand these rights and liabilities in detail. For example, in Ijarah,
the client may stop using the asset on his own, ask the bank to take the asset back and
refuse to purchase the asset at the price given by the bank, despite his promise. Ijarah
principles in fact allow him to do so, but the bank will have to see at the very beginning
how to mitigate such risks or overcome possible problems. Taking the past history of the
client in respect of financial matters could be useful.
Documentation
Documentation in Islamic banking is a very important area which needs to be focused
on. Proper preparation and development of documents for various contracts and adequate
execution could save the bank from many unforeseen losses during the course of business.
For example, a client wants to import something under sight L/C, needs the bank’s help only
for opening the L/C and does not want to get finance from the bank. In such a case, if the
bank has not taken full cover in advance, it might be in trouble if the client does not pay in
time, while the bank’s Nostro account has been debited. Now the bank can do nothing and
will have to suffer loss for the period of nonpayment by the client. An agency agreement
with the client, if entered into at the time of opening the L/C, could save the bank from the
loss, as it could undertake Murabaha with the client, covering the cost of funds for the credit
facility availed by the client.
The sequence and timing of various documents is extremely important and should be
properly taken care of. The master facility agreement in respect of various modes is the


----- p.369 (pdf 397) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 369
basic document that must cover all aspects of the related facility. To do this effectively, all
relevant staff of the bank should be trained to execute the documentation in the appropriate
manner.
Legal Framework
Another issue with Islamic banking is conformity with the legal framework in vogue. Unlike
conventional banking, Islamic banking products might need complete re-engineering with a
slight change in the legal framework, for which Islamic banks may get regulators’ guidance.
It is possible that an Islamic bank may have to develop the same product on an entirely
different structure to accommodate the legal framework. As Islamic banks cannot recover
the liquidated damages through any contractual arrangement in cases of default in timely
payment, they must keep in mind the legal options available in such situations. The issues of
third party obligations and guarantees are also very important and have to be kept in mind
while undertaking asset-based business of trade and leasing.
14.4 PROSPECTS AND ISSUES IN SPECIFIC AREAS OF
FINANCING
We shall briefly discuss financing in the following areas:
• working capital financing;
• trade financing;
• project financing;
• syndicate arrangements;
• inter-bank financing;
• liquidity management;
• Tawarruq arrangements;
• debit, charge and credit cards;
• securitization;
• central bank’s Islamic refinance.
14.4.1 Working Capital Finance
The banks, in order to facilitate trade or meet working capital requirements, may provide
facilities in connection with purchase/import and sale/export of goods and machinery, and
acquisition and holding of stock and inventory, spares and replacements, raw material
and semi-finished goods. Financing genuine trading activities could promote a number of
performance criteria in the economy. The most popular mode of finance for working capital
is Murabaha. Islamic banks have to purchase the raw material for sale to the clients on a
Murabaha basis. However, Murabaha alone cannot fulfil all the requirements of business
and industry. Customers, especially exporters, sometimes need financing for the processing
of raw material and to meet labour and overhead expenses.
Murabaha combined with Istisna‘a and Wakalah can fulfil banks’ requirements more
properly. The following may be the procedure for this purpose:
1. Murabaha is provided for the purchase of raw material.
2. Istisna‘a is provided to manufacture the required goods and pay overhead expenses.


----- p.370 (pdf 398) -----


370 Understanding Islamic Finance
3. The customer will manufacture and deliver the goods to the bank as per the L/C. Once
the goods are manufactured, the same will become the property of the bank.
4. The exporter can be appointed as agent to export the goods on behalf of the bank. The
export proceeds will be remitted to the bank, which will deduct from the proceeds the
cost of goods (Istisna‘a price) and profit; the client will pay the Murabaha price to the
bank as per the agreed schedule.
The Musharakah mode can also be adopted for working capital requirements by using
the concept of daily product, subject to fulfilment of the relevant Shar ¯ı´ah essentials. The
bank and the client can also agree that they will share the gross profits, so that indirect
expenses like depreciation of fixed assets, salaries of administrative staff, etc. shall not
be deducted from the distributable profits, meaning that the client will voluntarily bear all
indirect expenses. This aspect may be kept in mind while fixing the sharing ratio between
the bank and the client, by allocating a larger share to the latter. Expenses like those related
to raw materials, labour directly involved in production, electricity, etc. should be borne
jointly by the Musharakah.
Salam can also be used to finance the working capital needs of customers. It can be very
effectively used to finance the sugar, fertilizer and cement industries. The process in the
case of a sugar mill, for example, will consist of the following steps:
1. An Islamic bank enters into a Salam agreement with the sugar mill, under which the bank
will purchase sugar from the mill by paying the full price in advance. The mill is liable
to deliver the sugar on the agreed date. The bank may take a charge on the mill’s asset
against the payment made under the Salam agreement.
2. The bank enters into an agency agreement with the mill, under which the mill will sell
the sugar in the market at a mutually agreed solidus/advised price. It can also be provided
in the agency agreement that if the mill sells the sugar at a price higher than the agreed
price, it may keep the extra amount as a bonus.
3. On the delivery date, the mill informs the bank to take delivery from its godowns; the
bank takes delivery and authorizes the mill to sell the sugar on its behalf.
4. The sugar mill sells the sugar and pays the price to the bank; if the price is higher than
the agreed price, the bank may pay the extra amount to the mill, if so promised in the
agency agreement. However, if the market price falls below the agreed price, the bank
will suffer the loss.
14.4.2 Trade Financing by Islamic Banks
Trade finance operations of banks play an important role in the overall economic development
of any country, through facilitating imports and exports. Since it usually involves assets,
the conversion of the trade finance operation to Islamic modes is relatively easier. Islamic
banks can use Musharakah/Mudarabah in trade finance to build a profitable and secure
portfolio. So far, Musharakah use in this sector is minimal, but Islamic banks need to realize
the potential in trade financing through Shirkah arrangements, which can safely be used
on a consignment basis or for single transactions in financing of foreign trade, as already
explained in Chapter 12.
Banks should take service charges for opening L/Cs. Funds may be provided for imports on
the basis of profit/loss sharing or Murabaha. Similarly, banks can charge fees as negotiating
banks in exports. They can provide preshipment export financing on the basis of PLS or


----- p.371 (pdf 399) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 371
Murabaha. Discounting of bills, as in the case of post shipment financing, will have to be
replaced by a fee for agency services of the banks, which they will render for collection of
the bills’ amount on behalf of the exporters and the amount of the bills will be given to the
clients as interest-free loans.
Some other areas of trade financing are discussed below.
Alternative to Post Shipment Discounting
Exporters mostly need post shipment financing in the form of bill discounting. The practice
of bill discounting, being Riba-based, will have to be changed. The banks may provide
interest-free loans against the bills and take over the bills for collection from the drawee.
As collecting agent of the bills, the banks can receive agreed service charges. Negotiation
of the bills will be at the face value and the service charge will be amount-related and not
time-related. This will apply to inland as well as export bills. There should be no objection
if they use any of the Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant modes like Musharakah, Mudarabah, Istisna‘a, etc.
Islamic banks cannot provide the facility of bill discounting. However, Musawamah can
be used to partially help exporters in this regard. For example, on 1st January, 2007 an
exporter approaches an Islamic bank with a bill of US$100 000/- to be realized after 55
days (25th February, 2007) for discounting. Suppose the spot rate of the Dollar is Rs. 57.75;
the Islamic bank may agree to quote the rate of Rs. 57.60/US$ and the transaction will be
executed in the following manner:
1. The client identifies his needs for raw materials worth Rs. 5 760 000.
2. The bank disburses funds of Rs. 5 760 000/- to the client under the agency agreement
for the purchase of the agreed commodities.
3. The client purchases the material, gives declaration about possession of the stock and
makes an offer to the bank to purchase the stock held by it as agent, at US$ 100 000/-
to be paid on 25th February, 2007. The Islamic bank accepts the offer and a sale is
concluded.
4. On the due date, a foreign bank remits US$100 000/- in the client’s account maintained
with the Islamic bank. As per the authority given by the client, the Islamic bank debits
US$100 000/- from the client’s account and the transaction is completed.
There could be a number of other alternatives for interest-free post shipment finance.
Exporters normally require discounting of bills for preparation of the next consignments;
Islamic banks may facilitate this through Murabaha, Salam, Istisna‘a and a combination of
various modes and submodes. One case study involving a trade transaction is discussed
below.
Let’s assume a valued client, Abdul, of Islamic bank B has prepared an export consignment
of 100 million dollars from his own resources or through borrowing from the informal sector;
the consignment is almost ready for shipment as per a negotiable L/C already opened and
accepted in Abdul’s favour, involving the period of 90 days. Now, for payment of some
urgent liabilities, problems in the plant or other unexpected expenses, Abdul needs a huge
amount of liquidity within one week and approaches bank B for a solution without the
involvement of interest-based discounting. One solution that B can offer is that it purchases
the goods from Abdul on a cash payment basis; the L/C would be assigned in its favour, it
would appoint Abdul its agent and he would arrange to ship the goods on behalf of the bank.
The bank would get its profit margin while purchasing the goods from Abdul and receive


----- p.372 (pdf 400) -----


372 Understanding Islamic Finance
the proceeds of the bill after 90 days. In this way, the client would be helped without the
involvement of interest.
Commodity Operations
Islamic banks can undertake commodity operations of various government institutions on
the basis of Murabaha. For example, presently the governments in a number of countries
announce ‘support price’ of wheat to be procured by federal units or provincial governments
in the harvest season. The central banks advise the major commercial banks about the
purchase limits for the wheat procurement centres that are established by the provincial
governments. The farmers/suppliers supply the wheat at centres, the officials of which issue
purchase bills to them for the quantity received. Conventional banks provide interest-based
finance to the provincial governments and make payments to the farmers/suppliers. Upon
completion of the purchase process, the central banks adjust the account by debiting the
amount to the concerned provincial accounts.
To undertake Shar¯ı´ah-compliant commodity operations, Islamic banks may form a syndi-
cate or establish a company to purchase goods from the farmers/suppliers and sell the same
to the provincial governments with their profit margin. The company will undertake trading
functions through agencies like food departments and other well-established trade entities
that may serve as agents to the company. The company will be having tangible assets along
with some inventory of the goods purchased.
Murabaha–Istisna‘a Financing for Exports
Exporters need financing for the processing of raw material to prepare exportable goods. For
example, textile composite units purchase cotton to manufacture finished cloth; these units
cannot rely on Murabaha-based finance, since they also need huge amounts of liquidity for
meeting labour and other overhead expenses. They can be helped out through combining
Murabaha with Istisna‘a and Wakalah, as explained earlier. Istisna‘a is an exception where
forward sale is allowed without making full pre-payment. It relates to goods that require
manufacturing and the manufacturer (seller) undertakes to manufacture goods. It is, however,
necessary for an Istisna‘a transaction that the price is fixed and necessary specifications of
the product are clearly defined.
Import Financing through Murabaha
An Islamic bank and a customer will sign a master Murabaha agreement and an agency
agreement to finance L/Cs of the customer. As per the agency arrangement, the customer
will purchase goods from foreign suppliers on the bank’s behalf. The difference between
a general Murabaha agreement and an L/C Murabaha agreement lies in the fact that it is
possible in L/C Murabaha that a commodity may also be sold at cost price in the case of
a spot Murabaha. In order to accommodate such a transaction, agreements need to mention
that such transactions are regarded as Musawamah. Such a deal should be finalized only
after execution of the agency agreement.
An importer will request the bank to open an L/C by submitting all relevant documents.
On receipt of the L/C, the exporter will ship the goods and deliver the shipping documents
to the negotiating bank for payment of the bill amount. If the documents are found to be
in order, the negotiating bank will send documents to the Islamic bank. On receipt of the


----- p.373 (pdf 401) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 373
documents, the Islamic bank will contact the customer and inform him of the availability of
the documents. The customer will negotiate the FX rate for the required foreign currency
amount. The bill may be settled in the following ways:
• Normal payment: the Islamic bank will discuss the payment date with the customer and
if the customer wishes to settle the transaction, it will issue a Musawamah declaration to
the customer and sell the goods to the customer at the following price: L/C cost + all
other charges/expenses. After receiving the payment, the bank will release the shipping
documents to the customer. However, the bank’s risk on the goods will end only after
the asset is delivered to the customer.
If the customer requires financing, it will enter into a sub-Murabaha, which means
giving declaration and offer by the customer and its acceptance by the bank. Profit will
be charged from the day the bank’s Nostro is debited to the Murabaha settlement date,
according to the agreed profit rate. The bank will release the shipping documents to the
customer and record a Murabaha receivable.
• Settlement – payment against documents (PAD): sub-Murabaha will be booked on the
day the customer can arrange funds and shipping documents will be released on the same
day. The price will include profit from the day the bank’s Nostro account is debited until
the sub-Murabaha settlement date.
• Settlement – trust receipt (TR) Murabaha: TR Murabaha is the same as the case of normal
payment. The only difference is that the financing by the bank is done for a relatively
longer period, such as 120 days or more.
• Shipping guarantees or delivery orders (DO): if the goods have arrived prior to the
shipping documents, which is possible in the case of air cargo, the customer may request
the Islamic bank to issue a shipping guarantee or delivery order. The bank may take,
for example, 110 % margin from the customer and execute a sub-Murabaha based on the
FX rate prevailing on that date. The selling price will be fixed at that stage. If, however,
upon arrival of the documents, the final cost of the goods turns out to be higher or
lower than the cost price of the sub-Murabaha, the bank will settle the difference with
the customer by paying or receiving the differential amount. This adjustment in price
after the execution of Murabaha is permissible because Murabaha is a cost-plus-profit
transaction and it can be mutually stipulated that if the seller discovers after execution
of the Murabaha that the cost was higher or lower, he can settle the difference with the
buyer. However, only the cost portion may be adjusted, the profit portion should not be
adjusted.
14.4.3 Project Financing
Project financing can be provided through various modes of financing. Currently, Ijarah is
a popular mode of finance for undertaking project finance. However, if the project needs to
be installed or constructed, Ijarah cannot be used effectively. Some alternate products are
discussed below.
Construction/Erection of a Cement Plant (for example)
A bank can provide finance on Musharakah basis and enter into an Istisna‘a contract with
any industrial concern by appointing the customer its agent for supervision of the erection of
the plant. The bank will enter into a Musharakah contract with the client to operate the plant


----- p.374 (pdf 402) -----


374 Understanding Islamic Finance
and get a periodic profit payment in the form of rental on its part of ownership. Principal can
be recovered through selling of units to the client at the market price with proper offer and
acceptance. The client may go on purchasing the bank’s units until the bank’s investment
is redeemed. Ownership transfer can also be once, at the end of the investment period.
Partnership can also be for sharing of profits of the plant when it goes into production.
Syndication Arrangements for Construction of an Oil Terminal
Islamic banks can form syndicates for huge financing requirements of corporate customers.
A financing consortium and the terminal operator may enter into an agreement to Ijarah –
a kind of unilateral but binding promise. An Istisna‘a agreement may be executed between
a construction contractor and the financing consortium. The consortium may appoint the
terminal operator (the ultimate customer) its agent to supervise the construction. When the
terminal is ready for operations, the consortium and the terminal operator should enter into
an Ijarah agreement. However, Shar ¯ı´ah essentials and requirements of the Islamic modes
should be taken care of in syndication arrangements also.
Syndication Arrangements for Sukuk Issue and Securitization
Banks may also form syndicates to finance the projects of the public sector and the big
entities of the corporate sector through securitization and Sukuk issue. The securities created
through securitization of assets represent the proportionate ownership of the holders in the
assets underlying the Sukuk issue. The pool of assets of different natures being securitized
should comprise Ijarah or fixed assets valuing more than 50 % of the total worth of the pool,
according to the majority of the Islamic schools of jurisprudence. In this case, Sukuk can be
traded at any value in the secondary market. However, if the Hanafi view is adopted, trading
will be allowed even if the illiquid assets are more than 10 % of its total worth. Investors in
the pool will have a Musharakah relationship and each one will be a proportionate owner of
the pool.
The Sukuk holders assume the rights and obligations of the pool up to the extent of their
ownership. However, if the pool contains any debt instruments, i.e. Murabaha receivables,
the price of the Sukuk cannot be less than the value of such debt instruments. Other details
about Sukuk and securitization will be discussed in the next chapter.
14.4.4 Liquidity Management
Liquidity can be managed by dealing in the Islamic inter-bank fund market. There could be
direct placement of funds in the open market by surplus banks for use by deficit banks. The
Mudarabah contract is the most useful instrument for transactions in the inter-bank market.
A deficit bank would agree to give a share of its general profits according to a Mudarabah
ratio that could be negotiated according to the market conditions. The central bank may also
issue some guiding principles in this regard.
Liquidity management in Islamic banks can also be done through securitization of the
pool of income-generating assets. An Islamic bank (IB) would purchase Sukuk from the
government at par at the time of primary issue, and earn rental or profit. If the bank requires
liquidity, it may sell the Sukuk in the secondary market to another bank to generate cash,
and if the IB is in surplus, it can purchase Sukuk from the market. This would be similar
to the repo–reverse repo operations of conventional banks. However, the IB would sell and


----- p.375 (pdf 403) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 375
buy on an outright basis as two separate transactions. If the market is not liquid, the IB can
sell the Sukuk to the central bank to obtain liquidity.
If the IB requires financing without selling/purchasing Sukuk, it can do so by creating an
asset pool of its Murabaha and Ijarah assets and invite other banks and NBFCs to invest in
its pool. The share of Murabaha receivables should be less than 50 % of the total assets of
the pool. At the time of maturity, the investing bank would redeem its investment and the
IB would pay its share of profit.
Liquidity needs can also be met by way of Parallel Salam contracts, in which case the
purchaser would pay the whole sale price in advance.
The Tawarruq arrangement is also used by Islamic banks to place and obtain liquidity. For
this purpose, an Islamic bank in need of funds and a surplus bank select any commodity/stocks
of liquid nature (such as metals sold in the Commodity Exchange or blue chip stocks). The
IB purchases the commodity from another bank or any institution on credit (Murabaha) and
after taking delivery, sells it in the market at spot price. The process can be reversed if
the Islamic bank has to place liquidity with any other bank. On the face of it, the process
seems to be very simple; however, extreme care should be taken while undertaking such
transactions and it should be ensured that the transaction does not become a mere exchange
of papers.
The Tawarruq arrangement when used on the assets side gives a fixed guaranteed return
to the banks and can also be executed with conventional banks. Credit cards used by Islamic
banks in Malaysia are based on this concept combined with a buy-back arrangement. The
majority of the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars consider such cards non-Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant.
The product “Commodity Murabaha” based on Tawarruq is used by a number of IFIs
working in the Middle East. However, it is considered a grey area and Islamic bankers need
to realize that it should be used only in extreme cases to avoid interest where no other option
is available and even then under the guidance of the Shar ¯ı´ah board. Widespread use of such
products is harmful to the Islamic banking industry in the long run.
14.4.5 Forward Contracts and Foreign Exchange Dealings
In a forward market, the currency or commodity is sold for a future date and delivery of the
article as well as the currency is given on any future date. However, the specifications of
the article, time and place of delivery, as well as the currency and amount, are all settled in
advance. So the seller is hedged against any fall in price of the commodity and the buyer is
assured of the supply on time, as well as being covered against a possible increase in price
by the time he needs the commodity. But this feature of conventional Forex markets results
in the creation of fictitious assets and exploitation of any of the parties. As deliberated upon
in Chapters 3, 4 and 6, trading rules in respect of currencies are different from trading in
commodities other than monetary units. The Shar ¯ı´ah rules for trading in currencies are
briefly given in the following paragraphs.
Both parties to the exchange of currencies must take possession of the counter values
before dispersing, such possession being either actual or constructive. If the currency on
both sides is the same, the counter values must be equal in amount, even if one of them is in
paper money and the other is in coin of the same country, like a note of five pounds for five
pound coins. The exchange would be simultaneous without any deferment clause regarding
the delivery of one or both counter values. Return-free loans based on Tabarru‘, which are
noncommutative contracts, are exempt from this general rule. Some of the implications of
this rule of Islamic finance in respect of modern transactions are discussed below.


----- p.376 (pdf 404) -----


376 Understanding Islamic Finance
When a contract is concluded for the sale of an amount of currency, possession must be
taken for the whole amount at the time of concluding the transaction. Possession may take
place either physically or constructively. The form of taking possession of assets differs
according to their nature and customary business practices. Physical possession takes place by
means of simultaneous delivery by hand. Constructive possession of an amount of currency
or an asset is deemed to have taken place by the seller enabling the other party to take its
delivery and dispose of it, even if there is no physical taking of possession. Some of the
forms of constructive possession that are approved by both the Shar ¯ı´ah and business norms
are the following:
1. Crediting a sum of money to the account of the customer directly or through bank transfer.
2. A customer entering into a spot contract of currency exchange with the Islamic bank
against another currency already deposited in his account.
3. The bank debiting – by the order of the custome r – a sum of money to the latter’s account
and crediting it to another account in a different currency, either in the same bank or
another Islamic bank, for the benefit of the customer or any other payee.
4. Receipt of a cheque constitutes constructive possession, provided the balance payable is
available in the account of the issuer in the currency of the cheque and the bank has
blocked such a balance for payment.
5. The receipt of a voucher by a merchant, signed by the credit card holder (buyer), is
constructive possession of the amount of currency entered as payable on the coupon,
provided that the card-issuing Islamic bank pays the amount without deferment to the
merchant accepting the card.
Islamic banks are allowed to deal in foreign exchange remittances and the buying and
selling of foreign exchange on a spot basis. However, differences in time zones between
different foreign exchange markets require allowing two days’ delay for the clearing of
such operations, but the operation will be finalized on the rates of the date on which the
transaction was executed.
Islamic banks can undertake remittance transactions domestically and externally. Exter-
nally, they will need to have a correspondent relationship with many banks. Given the
predominance of interest-based banks, this will pose a great challenge to Islamic banks.
Some banks have managed to enter into agreements with correspondent banks without the
giving or taking of interest on the basis of reciprocal treatment. They keep foreign exchange
balances for agreed amounts and periods, i.e. they normally maintain credit balances and
are, in return, allowed debit balances to a limited level.
An exchange of two amounts that are debts, denominated in different currencies and
established as obligations, is permissible if it is in the fulfilment of the obligations in respect
of these debts and does not becomes a bilateral exchange of currencies. This covers the
following cases: for discharging two debts where one party owes an amount from another
party denominated in (say) dinars and the other party owes an amount from the first party
denominated in (say) dirhams, both may agree on the rate of exchange between dinars and
dirhams in order to settle the debts wholly or partially. This type of transaction is known as
set-off (discharge of a receivable debt against a payable debt). A creditor can take payment
of a debt due to him in a currency other than the currency in which the debt was incurred,


----- p.377 (pdf 405) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 377
provided the settlement is made as a spot transaction at the spot exchange rate on the day
of settlement. 1
As per the rules of exchange of monetary units, it is not permitted for one of the partners
in contractual Musharakah or Mudarabah to be a guarantor for the other partner, to protect
the latter from the risks of dealing in currencies. However, it is permissible for a third party
to volunteer to be a guarantor for that purpose, provided this guarantee is not stated in the
contract.
Forward Currency Cover
Islamic forward currency contracts are permissible when executed with the firm intention
of delivering and receiving the currency on the specified future date. If delivery and receipt
of the counter currencies bought and sold is not made, this will not be a valid transaction.
Due to the Shar ¯ı´ah restrictions, it can only be a unilateral promise to sell in the future at a
pre-agreed rate rather than an actual sale contract. The unilateral promise or moral obligation
is considered binding and is effective and well-recognized in the market; a defaulting party is
debarred from doing any further business. A bilateral promise to purchase and sell currencies
is forbidden if the promise is binding.
Accordingly, contemporary Shar¯ı´ah scholars have observed that forward foreign currency
cover is permissible subject to the following conditions:
1. The amount of foreign currency is needed for genuine trade or payment transactions. The
need will have to be supported by appropriate documents so as to prevent forward cover
for speculative purposes. This means that a currency dealer would not be permitted to
get a cover.
2. The forward cover shall be through a unilateral promise to sell or purchase and it
shall not be a sale/purchase agreement. This means that sale/purchase shall take place
simultaneously at the agreed time in future at the rate agreed upon initially at the time of
agreement to sell or purchase.
3. While it will be permissible to fix the price of foreign currency in terms of domestic
currency according to the promise, no forward cover fee can be recovered. However,
an amount may be demanded by the bank from its client in advance by way of earnest
money against foreign currency agreed to be purchased/sold at a future date. If, at the
agreed time, the party does not perform, the bank can recover the actual loss, if any, and
adjust the earnest money there against.
14.4.6 Refinancing by the Central Banks
In order to promote investment in certain priority areas like agriculture, exports or structural
overhead projects, some central banks provide to the commercial banks or NBFCs a refinance
facility against their disbursement to the priority areas. This refinance is normally based on
interest, but it is possible to provide such refinance in a Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant manner. For
example, the central bank in Pakistan (SBP) provides an Islamic export refinance scheme
(IERS) on the basis of Musharakah. Its main features are given below.
1 For details relating to the above, see AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standards on Set-off, 2004–5, pp. 46–48; Standard on Trading in
Currencies, clause 2/10, p. 8.


----- p.378 (pdf 406) -----


378 Understanding Islamic Finance
The framework of the IERS is based on the concept of Shirkah. The State Bank shares
in the actual profit of the Musharakah pool maintained by the Islamic bank that provides
export finance under various Islamic modes. However, if the actual profit of the pool is more
than ongoing rates under a conventional export finance scheme (EFS), the excess profit so
received by SBP is credited to the Takaful fund, a reserve fund to be maintained by SBP for
risk mitigation; the Takaful fund can be used to meet future losses arising on implementation
of the IERS. The salient features of the scheme are:
1. The facility initially is allowed only against an underlying transaction, designed on the
basis of Islamic modes of financing approved by the Shar ¯ı´ah board of the concerned
bank.
2. An Islamic bank desirous of refinance has to create a Musharakah pool (having a minimum
of (ten) blue chip companies – to be achieved in the first year of operations). Blue chip
companies mean such companies involved in the export business or other business or
both, or manufacturing concerns marketing their products in Pakistan or abroad, who have
(i) a good track record on the stock exchange or (ii) a rating of minimum B + or equivalent
by the rating agencies approved by the State Bank for rating banks in Pakistan, such a
rating should be acceptable to the bank as per its own lending policies for advancing
loans or (iii) a return on equity (ROE) during the last three years higher than the rates
of finance prescribed by the State Bank during those years on its conventional EFS. In
the case of a company which has been in operation for less than three years, the ROE of
the available number of years shall be considered. The Islamic bank has to ensure that
companies selected for the Musharakah pool under the above criteria do not have adverse
“Credit Information Bureau” reports.
3. The State Bank shares the overall profit of the pool (gross income less any provi-
sion created under prudential regulations during the period plus any amount recovered
against prior periods’ losses and reversal of provision) earned by the Islamic bank on
the Musharakah pool under the provisions of the IERS calculated on a daily product
basis.
4. If, on the basis of the annual audited accounts of the Islamic bank, the profit accruing
to the SBP is more than the profit paid to the SBP on a quarterly basis, as per the
unaudited accounts of earnings of the pool, the difference has to be deposited by the
Islamic bank, within seven days of its determination, in a special nonremunerative reserve
fund, “Takaful fund,” to be maintained at the office of the State Bank where the Head
Office/Country Office of the concerned bank is situated.
5. If, on the basis of the annual audited accounts of the pool, the share of the State Bank
in the profit works out to be less than the amount already paid to the State Bank on a
provisional basis, the State Bank has to refund the excess amount involved out of balances
held in the Takaful fund, if any.
6. In the event of loss suffered on the Musharakah pool on the basis of the annual audited
accounts, the Islamic bank and the State Bank shall have to share the loss in the proportion
of their share of investment in the pool expressed on a daily product basis. The share of
loss to the State Bank will first be met out of the credit balance in the Takaful fund, if
any. Any loss not met from the Takaful fund shall be borne by the State Bank.
7. In the case of loss, the Islamic bank is entitled to claim a refund on account of the share
of profit paid by it to SBP on a provisional basis, along with the SBP’s share in the loss
of principal amount extended to the Musharakah pool.


----- p.379 (pdf 407) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 379
14.4.7 Cards: Debit, Charge, Credit and ATM
Four types of card representing plastic money, which are issued by banks and other institu-
tions to withdraw cash from their accounts, to obtain credit or to pay for goods purchased
or services received, are debit cards, charge cards, credit cards and ATM cards. These cards
provide all or some of the benefits of liquidity, safety, mobility and flexibility to man-
age the budgets of the card holders. The AAOIFI has issued a Shar ¯ı´ah standard on these
cards (Standard # 2), which provides a useful basis for developing electronic money by
Islamic banks remaining within the Shar ¯ı´ah framework.2 Below, we briefly give the general
characteristics of the various cards.
A debit card, which is issued against the available funds in a customer’s account, gives
its holder the right to withdraw cash from his account and to pay for goods and services to
the limit of the available funds. The debit to the customer’s account is immediate and the
card doesn’t provide any credit. The issuing institutions normally do not charge customers
for using the card, except when it is used to withdraw cash or to purchase another currency
through another institution different from the institution that has issued the card. The issuing
institution may or may not charge a fee for issuing the card. Some institutions charge the
party accepting payment by means of the card by charging a certain percentage on such
transactions.
A charge card provides a credit facility up to a certain ceiling for a specified period of
time, along with providing a means of payment. It is used to pay for goods and services and
also to obtain cash. However, it does not provide a revolving facility and the card holder is
obliged to make payments for the goods and services on the basis of the statement sent by
the institution. In the case of a delay beyond the free credit period, the institution charges
interest to the card holder. It does not charge the card holder any commission on use of the
card. Rather, it receives a commission in percentage from the party accepting the card for
payment. The card-issuing institution has a personal and direct right against the card holder
to be reimbursed for any payments, irrespective of the relationship between the card holder
and the party accepting the card for payment.
A credit card provides a revolving credit facility, by which the borrower may use or
withdraw funds up to a pre-approved credit limit and the amount of available credit increases
and decreases as funds are borrowed and then repaid. In other words, the credit may be used
repeatedly. The borrower makes payments based only on the amount he has actually used
or withdrawn, plus interest. The borrower may repay over time (subject to any minimum
payment requirement) or in full at any time. Within the prescribed credit limit, the card holder
may purchase goods and services or withdraw cash. The free credit period is determined by
the issuing bank/institution. No interest is charged if the payment is made within the given
free credit period. In the case of cash withdrawals, there is no free credit period. The card
holder may defer the payment subject to an interest charge that is normally higher than the
general interest rate prevalent in the formal sector in an economy. The issuing institution
doesn’t charge the card holder any percentage commission on usage. Instead, it receives a
commission from the party accepting the card for payment. The institution is obliged to pay
the party accepting the card for purchases made by the card holder and this obligation is
independent of the relationship between the card holder and the party accepting the card
for payment. The institution has a personal and direct right against the card holder to be
2 For details, see AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Cards, pp. 16–27.


----- p.380 (pdf 408) -----


380 Understanding Islamic Finance
reimbursed for any payments, irrespective of the relationship between the card holder and
the party accepting the card for payment.
The most important of the above cards are credit cards, which provide revolving credit,
emergency buying power, worldwide payments through a single instrument and financial
security. The Jeddah-based OIC Fiqh Council has defined the credit card as follows:
“A credit card is a document that a bank issues to a natural or legal person according to a contract
between them. The card holder purchases goods or services from those who accept the card without
immediate payment of the price. Payment is made from the account of the bank, who, afterwards,
charges the card holder at regular time intervals depending upon the terms of the contract and the
situation”.
Shar¯ı´ah Position on Various Cards
The Islamic Fiqh Council, in its twelfth session (23–28th September, 2000) resolved that:
“It is not permissible to issue a credit card or use it if its conditions include imposition of interest.
This is so even if the card holder has the intention to pay (the price) within the moratorium period
that precedes imposition of interest. However, it is permissible to issue credit cards that do not carry
a condition of imposing interest on the credit. The bank can take from the card holder a specific
amount of money at the time of issuing or renewal of the card as fee that the issuer deserves
according to the services it provides to the card holder and any charge over and above this fixed
amount is impermissible because of being usurious. It is also permissible for the bank to take a
commission from the merchant on the goods or services purchased by the card holder, provided
that such goods or services are sold at the same price, whether in cash or credit”.
This, therefore, implies that charging an initial membership or periodic fee on credit cards
does not pose any Shar ¯ı´ah problem. However, financing through credit cards on the basis
of interest is prohibited. Thus, Islamic credit cards can take the form of “charge cards”,
where charges for the issuance of the card and recurring annual charges can be recovered
from the card holders, and transaction charges and commission can be recovered from the
merchants. However, if a loan or debt is created, no return can be charged thereon from the
card holders.
A debit card can be issued and used as long as the card holder does not exceed the balance
available in his account; no interest charge arises out of the transaction. Charge cards can
also be issued subject to the following conditions:
1. The card holder is not obliged to pay interest in the case of delay in paying the due
amount.
2. If the cardholder is required to deposit a sum of money as a guarantee and this amount
is not available for use by the card holder, then the issuing institution should invest it for
the benefit of the card holder on the basis of Mudarabah; any profit accruing on it should
be shared by the card holder and the institution according to the specified ratio.
3. The institution must stipulate and ensure that the card holder will not use the card for
purposes prohibited by the Shar ¯ı´ah.
4. It is permissible to purchase gold, silver or currency with a debit card or a charge card in
cases where the issuing bank is able to settle the amount due to the party accepting the
card without any credit period.
An Islamic bank or institution is not permitted to issue credit cards that provide an
interest-bearing revolving credit facility, whereby the card holder pays interest for being


----- p.381 (pdf 409) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 381
allowed to pay off the debt in instalments. IFIs can charge the card holder membership fees,
renewal fees and replacement fees. They can also charge a commission from the merchants
accepting the card in the form of a percentage of the purchase price of the items and services
availed using the card. Islamic banks and financial institutions can take membership of
international card regulatory organizations, remaining within the limits of the Shar ¯ı´ah, and
pay membership fees, service charges and other fees to them, as long as these do not include
interest payments, even in an indirect way, such as in the case of increasing the service
charge to cater for the granted credit.
A card holder can withdraw cash within the limit of his available funds, or more with the
agreement of the institution issuing the card, provided no interest is charged. The issuing
institution can charge a flat service fee for cash withdrawal, proportionate to the service
offered, but not a fee that varies with the amount withdrawn.
IFIs cannot grant the card holder privileges prohibited by the Shar¯ı´ah, such as conventional
life insurance, entrance to prohibited places or prohibited gifts. They can grant privileges
that are not prohibited, such as a priority right to services or discounts on hotel, airline or
restaurant reservations and the like. Thus, possible features of a Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant credit
card may be the following:
• an annual fee charged for issuing the card in order to cover expenses related to card
issuance and usage;
• an interest-free revolving credit line;
• the card confers on its holder the right to pay for goods or services purchased up to a
certain limit;
• a cash limit provided for emergency cases;
• a percentage commission from merchants accepting the card;
• the card holder to repay a certain amount of principal every month and the remaining
amount is deferred to the next month with no interest charged;
• a penalty levied as a deterrent against defaults for charity;
• the card holder must not use the card for purposes prohibited by the Shar ¯ı´ah.
Structures of Islamic Credit Cards Currently in Use
Credit Card of Emirates Islamic Bank
This card is based on Ujrah or a service charge. A yearly service charge is levied depending
on the credit card type, which is payable on a quarterly basis. The EIB credit card is
not the same as a charge card. It allows a customer to pay a minimum monthly amount
of 10 % of the outstanding balance (a minimum payment of UAED 100), as opposed to
a charge card, where the full amount is payable on the due date. It offers the following
benefits:
• free card delivery;
• free supplementary cards;
• a free EIB account with no minimum balance requirement;
• settlement by cash/cheque or direct debit to the EIB account;
• worldwide acceptance;
• a 100 % cash advance facility;
• free online access;


----- p.382 (pdf 410) -----


382 Understanding Islamic Finance
• a grace period up to 55 days;
• utility bill payments;
• 24-hour assistance through a dedicated call centre;
• no interest charge on the outstanding balance – the customer pays a fixed quarterly fee,
which allows him to use the card up to an approved limit.
Any amount over the actual credit limit immediately falls due and is payable once the
bank statement is delivered to the customer. A fixed fee of D75 is charged for any over
limit, irrespective of the amount over the limit. A fixed fee of D25 is levied, irrespective of
card type, for retrieval of one transaction slip. A fee of D20 is levied for each copy of the
statement, provided the requested statement is for less than three months. For any request
of a statement for more than three months, a fee of D100 per copy is levied, irrespective of
the card type.
The annual fee charged by the Emirates Islamic Bank on its credit card may be higher
than the annual fee charged by other conventional banks, but it is totally free from any
element of interest and there is no hidden cost associated with the usage of the card; all
fees are explicitly made known to the customer. Therefore, depending on usage, it may not
necessarily be expensive, vis-à-vis conventional credit cards in the competitive market. 3
Bank Islam Malaysia Card (BIC)
BIC is based on three contracts, namely Bai‘ al ‘Inah (buy-back), Wadi‘ah (deposit for
safe-keeping) and Qard al Hasan. The bank sells a piece of land to the customer at an
agreed cash price and repurchases at a lower deferred price. The difference in the price is
the bank’s maximum return, which is determined in advance, unlike a conventional credit
card whereby the interest charged is undetermined and it may further increase. The amount
is credited to the customer’s account under the concept of Wadi‘ah, and the customer can
use his/her BIC for retail purchases and cash withdrawals just like conventional credit cards,
except that each transaction is backed by the cash held in his/her Wadi‘ah BIC account.
The facility of an interest-free loan is granted in emergency situations and the card holder is
allowed to utilize funds above the available financing limit upon approval. The loan amount
needs to be settled in full within a specified period and in this case no charge or fee is
levied.
Due to the involvement of Bai‘ al ‘Inah, the Shar ¯ı´ah position of this card is questionable;
the scholars, other than some in the Far East, do not allow Bai‘ al ‘Inah. Islamic banks’
clients, as a whole, are also not inclined to accept it as a genuine Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant product.
AmBank Bank Berhad Al-Taslif Card
This is also based on the Bai‘ al ‘Inah concept through two contracts, namely a cash sales
contract and a deferred purchase contract; at times the deferred sale precedes the cash
purchase, but this is not an issue because the end result is the same, i.e. buy-back. AmBank
has identified some assets for the purpose, which are used for sale and then purchase, giving
the bank a profit margin and the customer an amount to be used through the card. The bank
does not allow transactions for six prohibited activities: bars, discos, night clubs, purchase
of beer, escort and massage services and gambling. 4
3 http://www.emiratesislamicbank.ae/eib/faqs/products/creditcardsfaqs.htm.
4 http://search.msn.com/results.aspx?srch=105&FORM=AS5&q=AmBank+Bank+Berhad+Al+-Taslif+Card.


----- p.383 (pdf 411) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 383
Kuwait Finance House Al Tayseer Credit Card
An annual fee is charged on the cards, which may be more than that of comparable conven-
tional credit cards, but no interest is charged. The bank also earns revenue from transactions
initiated through the cards. The monthly balance repayment is one-third of the outstanding
balance. The remaining two-thirds of the outstanding balance are rolled over to the next
month in a revolving credit scheme, but no interest is added. To ensure that at least one-third
of the outstanding balance is paid off every month, card holders should have either a salary
account with KFH or any other lien in favour of KFH. 5
The Al Tayseer card allows card holders to hold both a Visa and a Master Card with a
single joint credit limit and a single PIN number for both cards. Card holders can then choose
to use either card according to merchant preference and to exploit any special offers made
available by Visa and Master Cards. Therefore, the “dual card, one account” system is the
main advantage of choosing KFH’s Islamic credit card offering. Sometime back, KFH had
around 400 000 retail customers on its books, a customer base equivalent to approximately
35 % of Kuwait’s retail market.
Kuwait Finance House (Bahrain) Ijarah Card
This is an innovative product based on the concept of Ijarah, but its detailed features are not
available. The Ijarah Card enables users to finance their purchases of durable goods over a
tenure of up to 25 months. 6
Other Possible Structures of Cards
Credit cards can also be designed on the basis of Murabaha, whereby the bank may buy the
goods from the store and then sell them on deferred payment to the customer, the merchant
being the agent. This could be when an Islamic bank is issuing its own credit card. The
following may be the possible features of Murabaha-based credit cards:
• a pre-agreed master Murabaha contract with the card holder – the format for offer and
acceptance can be built into the receipt for every transaction;
• the bank can offer different packages with different tenures and different profit rates;
• a time value of money concept may be used but only for pricing the related goods;
• the issuer may agree with the card holder to any of the following two options:
— pay the price stipulated according to the Murabaha tenure, e.g. 100 + 5 = 105;
— pay within the given credit time, e.g. 100; bank gets a discount from the merchant.
A Musharakah basis could also be used, whereby the bank would enter into an agreement
with some stores, according to which it would provide funds to the stores on the basis of
profit-sharing and the bank would issue credit cards which customers could use to purchase
goods from such stores; the stores would administer the act of selling while the banks would
administer all other banking services. The bank and the stores would agree as to how they
would share the profits.
5 http://www.kfh.com/english/index.asp.
6 http://www.islamic-commerce.net/index.php?name=News&file=article&sid=331.


----- p.384 (pdf 412) -----


384 Understanding Islamic Finance
14.5 ISLAMIC BANKS’ RELATIONSHIP WITH CONVENTIONAL
BANKS
Islamic banks represent a link in the chain of the financial system. It seems inconceivable that
they could operate totally in isolation, disregarding conventional banks on the basis of the
prohibition of interest. An Islamic banking system set-up has been introduced in a number
of Muslim majority and Muslim minority countries. There is a lot of scope and also the need
for cooperation and business relationships between conventional and Islamic banks in many
areas, at national and international levels. This may be in respect of corresponding services,
foreign trade financing and cofinancing of the projects. Temporary placement of funds with
each other (on a basis other than interest) is unavoidable for banks, and particularly for
the Islamic banks, to ensure an adequate supply of liquidity at the time of need. Exchange
of information between the two and training programmes for orientation of the banks’
employees in the fields of feasibility studies, accounting, auditing, supervising, the latest IT
and communication-related techniques are also very important areas of cooperation between
the conventional and Islamic banks. 7
14.6 FEE-BASED ISLAMIC BANKING SERVICES
14.6.1 Underwriting
In investment banking services, underwriting is an important function of banking and non-
banking institutions which yields fee-based income to the underwriters. In the Islamic
framework, the underwriter shall bind himself to provide services of procuring the under-
written amount of capital, for which he can charge a fee/commission. Accordingly, it shall
be entitled to charge an underwriting fee only in consideration of arranging procurement
of the underwritten capital. Take-up commission by the underwriter for subscribing to any
unsubscribed amount of shares is not permissible. Shares to be subscribed by the underwriter
shall have to be at the offer price, as applicable to all other shareholders, without any increase
or decrease from the face value of such shares.
The Council of the Islamic Fiqh of the OIC, in its seventh session (9–14th May, 1992)
resolved that:
“Underwriting is an agreement made upon establishment of a company with someone who under-
takes to guarantee the sale of all or part of the shares issued, i.e. to subscribe to the shares that would
remain unsubscribed by others. There is no Shar ¯ı´ah objection to this provided that the underwriter
subscribes to the shares at nominal value without any compensation for the commitment per se ,
though he may receive compensation for services other than underwriting that he may have offered,
such as preparation of studies or marketing of shares.”
14.6.2 Letters of Guarantee (L/G)
Jurists generally do not allow fees or remuneration based on guarantees. However, some
jurists consider that the bank can take commission and fees, since a guarantee represents a
bunch of services including, Wakalah, against which banks can charge fees. Banks’ services
7 For details, see Ayub, 2002, pp. 214–218.


----- p.385 (pdf 413) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 385
involve some administrative expenses, therefore, they can recover expenses by way of fees
or guarantee commission. However, if the guarantee is called, banks will be entitled to
recover their principal amount only.
14.6.3 Letters of Credit (L/C)
Letters of credit are essential banking services, particularly in the area of international trade.
Shar¯ı´ah scholars have different views on how letters of credit should be treated. In literature
on Islamic banking, L/Cs are covered under various contracts like Wakalah and Kafalah for
businesses under Musharakah and Murabaha. Some say that they should be treated as a service
and charged at a fixed rate that will not vary with the duration or the volume of the letter
of credit. Other scholars allow for the fees to vary with the volume of L/Cs, as more or less
work and effort may be needed when officials of middle, senior and even top management
are involved, depending upon the volume of the L/Cs. Some Shar ¯ı´ah boards have suggested a
rate structure based on brackets rather than on a percentage basis. Other Shar ¯ı´ah boards have
decided that L/Cs should be treated on the basis of an agency arrangement at a fixed percentage.
However, the general view so far is that banks may be allowed to charge commission or fees
for L/Cs as service charges which may not be time-related.
It is suggested that we treat L/Cs as a banking service and not as a guarantee, except in
the case of standby letters of credit, which are used as a form of guarantee. However, L/Cs
differ in that some allow partial shipment, some are revolving, some need confirmation and
others have a red clause. In each case, the fee will differ, as the effort exerted will differ
with each type of L/C. Time will not be an element in the variation of fees, except as it
involves more or less administrative work.
Letters of credit may be opened for business on the basis of Murabaha or Musharakah.
In the former case, the bank would open the L/C for itself (or in the name of a client under
agency), and when it possesses the goods, it would sell them to the customer either on an
FOB or on a CIF basis. The fee could be added to the total cost of the goods.
Musharakah is more flexible, as the L/C may be in the name of the customer or the bank;
when the goods are received, the partner may sell them and the Musharakah liquidated or
the partner may buy the share of the bank. In the case of Musharakah, either the bank or the
customer can administer the L/C; this gives more flexibility to both parties and solves some
legal, Shar ¯ı´ah-related and procedural problems which are encountered in Murabaha L/Cs.
It is also possible for the bank to act as an agent to the beneficiary on behalf of the issuing
bank and, in return, charge a fee against the L/C.
There is no objection to Islamic banks opening documentary credits at conventional banks.
Islamic banks may ask correspondent banks to add their confirmation to an L/C opened on
behalf of foreign suppliers to importers. They would keep surplus in their accounts with the
correspondent bank to cover their obligations to the third party (the supplier). In this regard,
there are certain considerations to be taken into account:
1. An Islamic bank should not delay the transfer of the value of the L/C to the correspondent
abroad lest the correspondent bank should charge interest.
2. Import business conducted by an Islamic bank should not involve facilities for payment
on the part of suppliers in return for interest. This procedure often entails drawing drafts
on importers, guaranteed to be honoured for the benefit of the supplier, by the bank
opening the credit. Experience has shown that, in addition to the surplus maintained by


----- p.386 (pdf 414) -----


386 Understanding Islamic Finance
the Islamic banks, foreign banks have been accepting dealing on the basis of mutual
agreements by simple exchange of letters, to enable Islamic banks to avail confirmation
facilities up to an agreed ceiling without charging interest if the accounts are overdrawn.
In consideration, Islamic banks undertake to abide by the following:
— to keep a reasonable amount of cash in their current accounts with the confirming
banks;
— to endeavour to cover any debit as soon as possible (it is part of the understanding
that the Islamic bank does not ask for any return on any balance due to it, should
the other bank utilize these funds profitably. Therefore, there is no condition set by
the other party if the Islamic bank’s account remains overdrawn for some time).
As partial security, the correspondent bank will, on adding its confirmation, debit the
Islamic bank with a certain “cash margin”, which it will transfer immediately to its own
account. Thus, Islamic banks need, in fact, only to keep sufficient balances in their corre-
spondent bank’s account to cover the cash margins on the letters of credit.
Transfer of funds in a specific currency to be paid in the same currency is allowed with
or without a fee. In traditional Islamic finance literature, we come across the instrument of
“Suftajah” for cash transfer/payment, which involved the act of depositing a certain amount
of money with someone for settlement to the benefit of the depositor or his representative at
another place or in another country. If the transfer involves payment in any other currency,
the exchange operation at the agreed rate is carried out before the transfer.
14.7 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
IFIs are capable of covering almost all types of financial services being provided by the
conventional financial institutions, with the exception of conventional derivatives and some
Forex-related dealings. This exception may be rather good for them as it makes them
avoid overexposure and could save them from financial crises. Through indirect or direct
intermediation by commercial banking and investment banking institutions respectively, they
can effectively facilitate investment of funds profitably, remaining within the rules prescribed
by the Shar ¯ı´ah. Solid conceptual bases have been provided and now the practitioners need
to be innovative in the development of products, services and the financial business as a
whole, with commitment and Shar ¯ı´ah inspiration. Practice with Shar ¯ı´ah inspiration is more
likely to help enhance the credibility of the Islamic financial system and develop it on a
sustainable basis.
F o rR&D , Shar¯ı´ah scholars and finance experts need to collaborate more frequently.
Support at the regulators’ level is necessary, and this should be eagerly provided, as IFIs
are capable of deepening the financial markets and providing healthy financial services to
investors and the business community by enhancing the ambit of banks’ clientele.
IFIs may mobilize funds on the basis of Mudarabah and Wakalatul Istism ¯ar by offering
general or specific pools to individuals and the corporate sector. They may invest the funds
to facilitate business and industry, both through Shirkah-based and debt-creating modes,
keeping in mind the risk profile of the investors and the profitability and cash flow of
the fund users. They can provide working capital finance, trade finance, consumer finance
and project finance to public and private sector entities through individual or syndicate
arrangements.


----- p.387 (pdf 415) -----


Financing Principles and Practices 387
Along with Shar ¯ı´ah compliance, profitability and liquidity, Islamic banks need to keep in
mind the impact of their financing policies and products on the socio-economic development
of society, so as to play a role in employment generation, reducing income disparity and
poverty alleviation. As a part of their marketing strategy, they should promote the institution
of Qard al Hasan for SME and microfinance out of shareholders’ profits, reserves or the
funds credited to the Charity Account on various grounds. 8
Appendix: The major Functions of a Shar ¯ı´ah Supervisory
Board In the Light of the AAOIFI’s Shar ¯ı´ah Standard
The Accounting and Auditing Organization of Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI) has
prepared a standard for a Shar ¯ı´ah supervisory board, its composition and related aspects like
rulings, report, etc. According to this standard, a Shar ¯ı´ah board should be an independent
body of specialized jurists in Islamic commercial jurisprudence. It may also include other
experts in areas of Islamic financial institutions with knowledge of Islamic jurisprudence
relating to commercial transactions.
The Shar¯ı´ah board is entrusted with the duty of directing, reviewing and supervising the
activities of the Islamic financial institution in order to ensure that it is in compliance with
Islamic Shar¯ı´ah rules and principles. The Fatwahs, and rulings of the Shar ¯ı´ah supervisory
board are binding on the Islamic financial institution.
According to the AAOIFI Standard, a Shar ¯ı´ah board should consist of at least three
Shar¯ı´ah scholar members. It may seek the services of consultants having expertise in busi-
ness, economics, law, accounting and/or others. It should not include directors or significant
shareholders of the Islamic financial institution.
The following is the illustrative wording of any Shar ¯ı´ah board’s report on operations of
Islamic financial institutions:
“We have reviewed the principles and the contracts relating to the transactions and applications
introduced by the Islamic Financial Institution (IFI) during the period ended /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiWe have also
conducted our review to form an opinion as to whether the institution has complied with Shar ¯ı´ah
rules and principles and also with the specific Fatwahs, rulings and guidelines issued by us. 9
We conducted our review, which included examining, on a test basis of each type of transaction,
the relevant documentation and procedures adopted by the Islamic Financial Institution. We planned
and performed our review so as to obtain all the information and explanations which we considered
necessary in order to provide us with sufficient evidence to give reasonable assurance that the
institution has not violated Islamic Shar ¯ı´ah rules and principles.” 10
The Shar ¯ı´ah board should particularly focus on the Shar ¯ı´ah compliance of financial
structures, including products, documentation and the process of transactions. Where appro-
priate, the report of the board should include a clear statement that the financial statements
have been examined for the appropriateness of the Shar ¯ı´ah basis of allocation of profit
between the equity holders and the depositors.
8 The author is grateful to Mr Faisal Shaikh of Bank Islami Pakistan for sharing knowledge on practical issues of Islamic finance,
particularly for this chapter.
9 AAOIFI, 2004–5b, Governance Standard No. 1, Shar ¯ı´ah Supervisory Board, para. 13.
10 AAOIFI, 2004–5b, Governance Standard No. 1, Shar ¯ı´ah Supervisory Board, para. 16.


----- p.388 (pdf 416) -----


388 Understanding Islamic Finance
The Shar ¯ı´ah board’s report should also include a clear statement that all earnings that
have been realized from sources or by means prohibited by Islamic Shar ¯ı´ah rules and
principles have been disposed of to charitable causes. In the case of violation of any Shar ¯ı´ah
rules or rulings of the Shar ¯ı´ah board, the board should indicate the violations in its report.
The central Shar ¯ı´ah boards may also approve the fit and proper criteria for appointment of
Shar¯ı´ah advisors in Islamic banking institutions.
The AAOIFI has also issued standards on Shar ¯ı´ah review by the Shar ¯ı´ah boards (Gov-
ernance Standard No. 2) and internal Shar ¯ı´ah review (Governance Standard No. 3) by an
independent internal audit department of the respective banks. Shar ¯ı´ah review is to be
carried out in the following stages:
1. Planning review procedures.
2. Executing the review procedures and preparation of working papers.
3. Documenting the conclusion and report.
Internal Shar¯ı´ah review should be conducted to examine and evaluate the extent of compli-
ance of the Shar ¯ı´ah rules in the light of the guidelines provided by the Shar ¯ı´ah supervisory
board.

