
----- p.389 (pdf 417) -----


15
Sukuk and Securitization: Vital Issues
in Islamic Capital Markets
15.1 INTRODUCTION
The growth of Islamic banking and finance has gained momentum during the last decade,
particularly in the areas of Sukuk and securitization. In addition to a large number of products
for retail banking and investment instruments, securitization in the framework of the Islamic
finance industry has developed a lot of momentum. While Shirkah-based instruments of
investment like Mudarabah certificates and participation term certificates (PTCs) have been
in use since the early 1980s, local currency instruments/Sukuk based on modes other than
Shirkah have been issued since 1992. The first issue of dollar-denominated Sukuk of $600
million was offered in Malaysia in 2002. This was followed by the launching of $400 million
Solidarity Trust Sukuk of the Islamic Development Bank in September 2003. Since then,
about forty sovereign and corporate Sukuk issues have been offered in Bahrain, Malaysia,
Saudi Arabia, Qatar, UAE, the UK, Germany, Pakistan, Indonesia, The Philippines and
a number of other countries. Prominent Sukuk issues include PCFC’s’s Sukuk of USD
3.5 billion to help fund DP World’s acquisition of the UK’s P&O, $3.52 billion Sukuk
offered by Nakheel, the property arm of Dubai’s DP World, and Pakistan’s sovereign Sukuk
of $600 million. 1
Sukuk are gaining popularity as an alternative source of funding, particularly for sovereigns
and corporate bodies. Their growth has been fuelled by strong demand in the global capital
market for Shar¯ı´ah-compliant instruments. Standard & Poor’s, the well-known rating agency,
has put the market for Islamic financial products – banking, mortgages, equity funds, Sukuk,
Takaful, project finance, etc. – at $400 billion. 2 Sukuk have taken a crucial position among
the instruments of Islamic capital markets by providing an alternative to conventional fixed-
income securities issued for funding large developmental and capital expenditures of the big
entities and facilitating IFIs and investors in managing liquidity with profitability.
Two decades back, it was considered that only an equity market is possible in an Islamic
finance framework for financing long-term projects. This may be partly true, as debts cannot
be sold as per Shar ¯ı´ah principles unless their trading is subject to the rules of Hawalah, i.e.
at face value with recourse to the assignor. Hence, debts cannot generate any return. But
the emergence of Sukuk, particularly Ijarah Sukuk and the Sukuk backed by a mixed asset
pool, has tended to imply that some features and benefits of a debt market are possible even
in an Islamic financial structure.
The major requirement for making an investment certificate Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant is that it
should not represent interest-bearing debt as dominant part of the underlying assets. The
1 See http://www.lmcbahrain.com.
2 The Economist , 9th–15th December, 2006, p. 73.


----- p.390 (pdf 418) -----


390 Understanding Islamic Finance
Sukuk issued on the bases of Shirkah and Ijarah represent the ownership of the underlying
assets by the Sukuk holders; hence, the same can be traded in the secondary market at the
price determined by the market forces. A typical debt market provides a fixed return and
secondary market trading facilities; Sukuk issued on the basis of Ijarah and pools of mixed
assets – fixed as well as intangible like receivables – can also provide the same facility,
subject to the fulfilment of certain criteria. Near alternatives of conventional bonds can,
therefore, be developed through securitization of assets. The instruments created through
securitization of assets represent the proportionate ownership of their holders in the assets.
Like the two categories of modes in Islamic finance, i.e. participatory and fixed-
return/debt-creating, Sukuk or investment instruments can also be variable-return Sukuk
(VRS) and fixed-return Sukuk (FRS). But the FRS are different from the conventional debt-
related instruments like bonds and debentures because, in principle, the return on Islamic
instruments will be quasi-fixed, as we shall explain in this chapter, unless an independent
third party guarantee is provided, as admissible under the Shar ¯ı´ah rules.
15.2 THE CAPITAL MARKET IN AN ISLAMIC FRAMEWORK
Before discussing Sukuk and securitization, we may briefly see the salient features of the
capital market comprising debt, equity and the Sukuk markets. An equity market, commonly
known as a stock market, is the trading place for the stocks of joint stock companies. A
debt market, which deals in debentures and bonds, normally involves Riba and Gharar and,
therefore, is not an active part of Islamic financial markets. Debts can only be assigned to
others on a par value without transferring the risk of default. This process is called Hawalah
in Fiqh terminology. The difference between sale and assignment is that transfer in Hawalah
is with recourse, while transfer in ordinary sale is without recourse.
Key components of an Islamic capital market are Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant stocks, Islamic
funds and Sukuk/Islamic investment certificates. The basic concept of a stock market is
permissible under Shar¯ı´ah. However, there are certain conditions which need to be followed
for investments in stocks conforming to the Shar ¯ı´ah principles. Shar¯ı´ah guidelines in respect
of stocks have already been given in Chapter 8 and to some extent in Chapter 12.
An Islamic capital market can be developed by developing Sukuk, introducing Islamic
depository receipts (IDRs) at a mass level, replacing debt financing with Shirkah-based
indirect and direct financing, securitization and fund management. While IDRs refer to an
arrangement for trading of stocks in countries other than their origin (see Box 15.1), Sukuk
represent common undivided shares in the ownership of underlying assets with the effect
that the Sukuk holders share the return as agreed at the time of issuance and bear the loss,
if any, in proportion to their share in investment. Issuance of Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant Sukuk
would result in enhanced supply of risk-based capital with limited risk-taking on account of
the prohibition of Riba, gambling and Gharar and a balanced return rate structure based on
real-asset-backed economic activities.
Box 15.1: Developing Islamic Depository Receipts (IDRs)
A GDR is a negotiable certificate held in the bank of one country representing a
specific number of shares of a stock traded on an exchange of another country.
It is an arrangement for trading of stocks in countries other than their origin. The


----- p.391 (pdf 419) -----


Sukuk and Securitization 391
following are a few specialized GDRs: American depositor receipts (ADRs); European
depository receipts (EDRs) and Islamic depository receipts (IDRs). Parties to an IDR
would be the originator of the underlying asset, an investor and the custodian bank.
Shar¯ı´ah-compliant stocks and other instruments are to be traded under IDRs.
Advantages of IDRs
For the originators
• expansion of investor base;
• low cost of funds in highly liquid markets;
• better image of securities by trading in more organized markets.
For the investors
• diversification of portfolio in other markets;
• IFIs to have Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant stocks;
• higher returns for IFIs than conventional placements in Murabaha;
• liquidity management facility for IFIs.
Importance of IDRs
• convergence of Islamic capital markets;
• an alternative to cross-listing;
• better regulatory environment due to listing of IDRs;
• generation of development funds for developing Muslim countries;
• standardization of Shar ¯ı´ah compliance standards across jurisdictions;
• growth of Islamic capital markets.
Institutions supporting IDR development include
• Islamic Development Bank (IDB);
• International Islamic Financial Market (IIFM);
• rating agencies;
• International Financial Services Board (IFSB);
• local regulatory bodies;
• Islamic financial institutions.
15.3 SECURITIZATION AND SUKUK
The traditional business model of financial institutions revolved around originating an asset
and holding it until maturity. But now, financial institutions increasingly resort to securiti-
zation, which is a process of pooling/repackaging the nonmarketable and illiquid assets into
tradable certificates of investment. Securitization transforms the originator’s role from being
an accumulator to that of a distributor. In Islamic finance it has become a stimulating factor,


----- p.392 (pdf 420) -----


392 Understanding Islamic Finance
which refers to the process in which ownership of the underlying assets is transferred to a
large number of investors in the form of instruments, presently termed Sukuk (the plural of
the word Sak, or Sanadat, meaning certificate of investment or simply certificates).
The ownership of the securitized assets is transferred to a special purpose vehicle (SPV) or
special purpose Mudarabah (SPM) that is set up for the dual purpose of managing the assets
on behalf of the Sukuk holders and for the issuance of the investment certificates. The SPV
that serves as Mudarib manages both the liabilities and assets of the issues. The contractual
rights attached to Sukuk determine the mutual ownership and benefits of the securitized
assets for the individual investors who subscribe to the Sukuk. The Sukuk holders earn any
revenue generated by the project and/or capital appreciation of the assets involved.
The AAOIFI has defined investment Sukuk as certificates of equal value representing
undivided shares in the ownership of tangible assets, usufruct and services or (in the own-
ership of) assets of the particular projects or any specified investment activity. 3 Investment
Sukuk should be distinguished from common shares and bonds. While shares represent
the ownership of a company as a whole and are for an indefinite period, Sukuk represent
specified assets and are for a given period of time (so far issued for periods ranging from
three months to ten years). Sukuk, unlike bonds, carry returns based on cash flow originating
from the assets on the basis of which they are issued.
Islamic financing being asset-backed by nature, provides ample opportunities for issuance
of Sukuk on the basis of assets already booked by IFIs or by purchasing the assets with
proceeds of a variety of Sukuk created on the principle of Shirkah. The process and the
procedures applied for Sukuk issue are almost same as those used for securitization in the
conventional set-up, with the exception of avoiding Riba, Gharar and the activities prohibited
by the Shar ¯ı´ah.
Securitization involves evaluating, isolating and efficiently allocating specific risks, eval-
uating the taxation, accounting and legal implications, designing appropriate credit enhance-
ment structures 4 and pricing the (residual) risk for pricing the units of the securitized assets
or pools. Securitization provides a premium over equivalent related plain securities and
better stability than vanilla papers. Other benefits of securitization for investors include:
focused risks associated with securities, portfolio diversification, tailored cash flow struc-
tures backed by the securitized assets, a flexible range of maturities and experienced risk
assessment.
Securitization is also beneficial for the originator, as it provides incentives for developing
a transparent fund approval process, efficient collection procedures, and a well-built mecha-
nism to control this process. Public availability of information about pool performance adds
to confidence in securitized papers. New forms of securities in the form of Sukuk assist the
development of capital markets, attract conservative buyers, draw international capital and
facilitate the efficient sharing of risks.
Securitized papers are generally traded at a premium over vanilla corporate papers of
similar rating and tenor. The premium depends on the liquidity/active secondary market for
the securitized paper, the complexity of the transaction structure, investors’ comfort with
the underlying collateral and investors’ demand at the time of issuance. It makes them
3 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Investment Sukuk, p. 298.
4 Credit enhancements in respect of Sukuk could be internal and/or external collateral aspects, in addition to the underlying
assets, to reduce the risk to investors and to enhance the rating of the issue. Some examples are: cash reserves, Takaful cover,
overcollateralization, early warning triggers performance guarantee by originators of facilities and third party guarantee, if possible.


----- p.393 (pdf 421) -----


Sukuk and Securitization 393
an effective and attractive tool for mobilizing long-term funds for financing development
projects in industry, agriculture and real estate development.
15.3.1 Parties to Sukuk Issue/Securitization
Various parties are involved in Sukuk transactions. Key players in various issues of
Sukuk are:
• The originator or the issuer of Sukuk, who sells its assets to the SPV and uses the
realized funds. Originators are mostly governments or big corporations, but they could
be banking or non-banking Islamic financial institutions. The issuers may delegate, for a
consideration or a commission, the process of arranging the issue.
• The SPV – an entity set up specifically for the securitization process and managing the
issue. It purchases assets from the originator and funds the purchase price by issuing
Sukuk. Sometimes, the SPV is also referred to as the issuer.
• Investment banks – as issue agents for underwriting, lead managing and book-making ser-
vices for Sukuk against any agreed-upon fee or commission. These services are provided
by syndicates of Islamic banks and big multinational banks operating Islamic windows.
• Subscribers of Sukuk – mostly central banks, Islamic banks and NBFIs and individuals
who subscribe to securities issued by the SPV.
Other parties to the general securitization process may include:
• the obligor: a contractual debtor to the originator who pays cash flows that are securitized;
• the lead manager: as structurer for designing and executing the transaction and as arranger
for the securities – may be a company/trust/mutual fund that provides services for man-
aging the issues;
• the servicer: collects and administers the rentals from obligors, monitors and maintains
assets;
• the cash administrator or receiving and paying agent: the banker for the deal who manages
inflows and outflows, invests interim funds and accesses cash collateral;
• the credit enhancement provider: provides credit enhancement by way of guarantees,
Takaful/insurance, etc.;
• the credit rating agency: provides a rating for the deal based on structure, rating of parties,
legal and tax aspects;
• the legal and tax counsel: provides key opinions on the structure and underlying contracts
with respect to their legal and tax implications;
• the auditor: appointed for conducting due diligence, both initial and during the deal;
• the custodian/R&T agents: appointed for registration/transfer of securities and safe custody
of the underlying documents. It actually holds the assets as agent and bailee for the
trustee.
Classes of securitized papers include:
• asset-backed securitization (ABS);
• pool-based securitization:
— mortgage-backed securitization;


----- p.394 (pdf 422) -----


394 Understanding Islamic Finance
— CDO/CLO: collateralized debt/loan obligations (not Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant unless sub-
jected to the rules of Hawalah);
— lease rentals securitization (for Shar ¯ı´ah compliance of Ijarah Sukuk, ownership of
the assets must also be transferred to the Sukuk holders);
• future flow securitization (FFS):
— securitization of receivables to be generated in future;
— road toll securitization (transfer of pro rata ownership to Sukuk holders necessary for
Shar¯ı´ah compliance);
— telecom receivable securitization;
— credit card receivable securitization (not Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant unless subjected to the
rules of Hawalah).
A flow diagram of the typical securitization process is given in Figure 15.1.
Originator
Obligors 
T &R Account
SPV
Subordinate Investor
(Originator)
Servicer  
Senior Investors
Purchase
consideration
Pool 
collections
Pool
collection
Pool
collections
Sale of receivables
Monthly Payments
Issue of PTCs
Subscription to  PTCs
Agreements
Initial Cashflows
Monthly Cashflows
Issue of PTCs
Figure 15.1 Flow diagram of the securitization process 5
15.3.2 Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV)
SPVs are formed as separate legal entities for the specified purpose of managing the securities
issues. As such, an SPV is capital and tax efficient – it does not add to the costs of the transaction.
Major characteristics of a typical SPV include bankruptcy remoteness and thin capitalization.
5 The author is grateful to M/s Ashar Nazim, Arsalan Siddiqi and Shazia Farooq of Islamic Capital Partners, Karachi and
Mr Muhammad Sajid, CEO, JS Finance, Karachi for their help in preparing flow diagrams and charts and also for sharing vital
information on securitization and Sukuk.


----- p.395 (pdf 423) -----


Sukuk and Securitization 395
The legal structure of an SPV depends upon the regulatory and legal environment in which it
has to work. It has to be ensured that the sale to the SPV is true and there is a proper segregation
of the asset from the original owner. Once the ownership has been transferred to the SPV, the
discretion of the original owner in respect of the asset comes to an end, and it cannot be reversed
in the case of insolvency of the original owner or otherwise.
Alternative payment structures adopted by SPVs include the “pass-through structure” –
the SPV remits any funds collected completely and immediately to the investors – and
the “pay-through structures” – desynchronization of servicing of the securities from the
underlying cash flows. SPVs may also have discretion to reinvest the funds and pay investors
according to a predetermined schedule. They may also serve as “conduits” – vehicles set up
for multiple issuances (typically in the case of securitization of receivables of credit cards
and commercial papers).
15.3.3 Risk, Contract and Cash Flow Analysis
The lead bankers have to undertake minute risk analysis in respect of credit and bankruptcy
risk (the ability of the entity to pay its obligations and survive as a viable entity); perfor-
mance risk (the ability to fulfil contractual obligations); asset/collateral risk (variation in the
value of the underlying asset); payment risk (the ability of other parties, particularly credit
enhancement providers, to meet their obligations); return rate risk (variation in return rate
structure); exchange rate risk; liquidity risk (the ability to liquidate the underlying assets
or the collateral to service the investor); risk of loss of money collected and retained by
the servicer for a short period before remitting to the SPV; prepayment risk (variation in
maturity of the investments made by the investors due to prepayment by obligors); reinvest-
ment risk in pay-through structures (variation in the returns earned on investments made by
the SPV for the period until the prespecified dates, and the legal/regulatory/tax related risk
(interpretation of various laws, regulations and complex documentation).
Contract analysis focuses on rights and obligations, performance requirements, termina-
tion, events of default and consequences of defaults, with the purpose of knowing the ability
to fulfil the rights and obligations. It also includes study of transaction documentation.
Cash flow analysis is conducted to identify key variables and expected patterns of the
underlying cash flows under various scenarios and to determine the rating.
Box 15.2: Securitization Mitigates the Risks
Originator’s perspective Investors’ perspective
• mitigates liquidity risk of an
illiquid asset;
• foreign exchange risk is reduced
if underlying asset is denominated in
multiple currencies;• reduced cost of funding;
• takes assets off balance sheet,
without loss of use;
• pooling of diversified assets with
heterogeneous risk mitigates earnings
risk;
• reduced cost of finance if SPV is
serving as multiple originators by
pooling assets.
• undivided ownership of the asset is an
added protection.


----- p.396 (pdf 424) -----


396 Understanding Islamic Finance
15.3.4 Shar ¯ı´ah Bases of Sukuk Issue
The AAOIFI, in its Shar ¯ı´ah Standard for Investment Sukuk, has discussed the following
types of investment certificates or Sukuk:
1. Sukuk of ownership in leased assets: further divided into Sukuk of ownership of usufruct
of existing assets, Sukuk of ownership of described future assets, Sukuk of ownership of
services of a specified party and Sukuk of ownership of described future services.
2. Salam Sukuk.
3. Istisna‘a Sukuk.
4. Murabaha Sukuk.
5. Musharakah Sukuk: further divided into participation certificates, Mudarabah Sukuk and
investment agency Sukuk.
6. Muzara‘ah (share-cropping) Sukuk.
7. Mus ¯aqah (projects involving irrigation of fruit-bearing trees) Sukuk.
8. Mugh ¯arasah (projects involving plantation of gardens) Sukuk.
The most important of the above Sukuk or certificates of investment with sizeable potential
are those issued on the basis of Shirkah, Ijarah, Salam and Istisna‘a. As per the basic rules of
Shar¯ı´ah, investment Sukuk have to be structured, on one side, on the principle of Shirkah.
However, depending upon the nature of the asset, usufruct of assets or services involved,
certificates can be structured to be designated as Ijarah Sukuk, Salam Sukuk and Istisna‘a
Sukuk. On the other side, business could be conducted through participatory or fixed return
modes/instruments. Thus, the rates of return on Sukuk will be either variable (if the modes
on the second leg are participatory) or quasi-fixed (in the case of cash flow from assets
securitized through modes with fixed return). However, any third party guarantee can make
the Sukuk fixed-return certificates of investment. 6
The issuers or the Sukuk holders can adopt any permissible methods of managing and
mitigating risks, such as creating a Takaful fund with contributions from certificate holders,
or taking cover from Islamic Takaful companies and paying the contributions from the
income of the issue or donations of the Sukuk holders. It is also permissible to set aside
a certain percentage of the profit in order to mitigate fluctuations of distributable profit,
subject to the condition that proper disclosure was made in the prospectus of the issue.
Disgusting Bases of Sukuk Issues and Trading
Most of the Sukuk issues so far are based on the concept of Ijarah, while a few Sukuk are
based on Shirkah, Salam or pooled assets. A number of Sukuk issues are subject to severe
criticism due to the involvement of Bai‘ al ‘Inah, Bai‘ al Dayn and other non-Shar ¯ı´ah-
compliant traits that make the Sukuk as good or as bad as interest-based bonds. Bai‘ al ‘Inah
is a double sale by which the borrower and the lender sell and then resell an object between
them, once for cash and once for a higher price on credit, with the net result of a loan with
interest. As such, it is a legal device to circumvent the prohibition of Riba. Sukuk issues
of Malaysia are mostly based on the concepts of Bai‘ al ‘Inah of underlying assets and the
concept of Tabarru‘ (donation to the investor irrespective of the cash flow of the project
6 Council of the Islamic Fiqh Academy, 2000, p. 65; AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Guarantees (No. 5), clause 7/6 and Standard
on Sukuk (No. 17), clause 5/1/8/7.


----- p.397 (pdf 425) -----


Sukuk and Securitization 397
underlying the Sukuk or certificates), while their trading in the secondary market takes place
through Bai‘ al Dayn. (Lately, they have also been issuing Ijarah Sukuk, which is a healthy
development.)
Rosly and Sanusi have concluded in this regard:
“The use of a legal device is therefore evidence that the Niyyah (intention) factor is undermined
or made secondary in the securitization process of Islamic bonds in Malaysia /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmiTo retain the
basic structure of traditional bonds in Islamic finance, that is providing fixed return to investors,
practitioners and the relevant Shar ¯ı´ah experts may have wrongly applied Shar ¯ı´ah laws, which
implies now that the legitimacy of Islamic bonds issued using Bai‘ al ‘Inah is suspect.” 7
In the case of a variety of Malaysia-based Sukuk, secondary market trading of Sukuk
is conducted on the basis of Bai‘ al Dayn. However, the majority of jurists do not accept
this, even though the debt represented by Sukuk is supported by the underlying assets. The
traditional Muslim jurists are unanimous on the point that Bai‘ al Dayn with discount is
not allowed in Shar ¯ı´ ah. The overwhelming majority of contemporary Shar ¯ı´ah scholars are
also of the same view. However, some scholars from Malaysia have allowed this kind of
sale. They normally refer to the ruling of the Shafi‘e school, but they do not consider the
fact that the Shafi’e jurists allowed it only in a case where a debt was sold at its par value. 8
Rosly and Sanusi have observed in this regard:
“The trading of Islamic bonds at a discount using Bai‘ al Dayn has been found unacceptable by
the Jamhur Ulama, including al-Shafi‘e. As such, the position of Malaysian Islamic bonds remains
unacceptable among the Middle Eastern jurists, although some Malaysian jurists found this the
opposite.”
The OIC Islamic Fiqh Council, which has the representation of all Islamic countries,
including Malaysia, has also approved the prohibition of Bai‘ al Dayn unanimously, without
a single dissent.
In contrast to the Bai‘ al ‘Inah concept, which is prohibited, the experts in Shar ¯ı´ah
principles allow the use of a sale and lease-back technique. This is because of the flexibility
in the Ijarah contract, as discussed earlier. An asset can be purchased from a party and then
leased to that party. In this case, the Ijarah contract should not be executed unless and until
the IFI has acquired the asset. 9 As such, the sale and lease-back technique does not create
any Shar ¯ı´ah-related problem, particularly in respect of Sukuk issue on the basis of Ijarah,
provided the sale of the asset is complete in all respects and then the Ijarah rules are made
applicable. (Use of sale and lease-back in the case of consumer durables is not considered
desirable by many Shar ¯ı´ah scholars and even practitioners, and they allow it only where the
client wants to avoid interest-based financing and there is no other way out.) Assets leased
under this technique can again be sold to the original owner, as in the case of most of the
sovereign Ijarah Sukuk issued so far. Shar ¯ı´ah scholars suggest, however, that sufficient time
should pass before the lessee repurchases the asset, in which time there is the possibility of a
change in the value and structure of the asset being sold and leased back. They recommend
that in such cases, the client should purchase back the asset at least after one year of sale.
This is to ensure that the technique is not used as a back door to interest.
7 Rosly and Sanusi, 1999, 1(2) (http://islamic-finance.net/journal.html).
8 Usmani, 2000a, pp. 216–217.
9 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, pp. 140, 152.


----- p.398 (pdf 426) -----


398 Understanding Islamic Finance
Ijarah has great flexibility and a large potential for Sukuk issue, but some of the features
of Ijarah Sukuk issues or the agreements involved in the process are pointers to different
Shar¯ı´ah-related problems. As per Shar ¯ı´ah rules, Sukuk holders have to jointly bear the risks
of an asset’s price and the ownership-related costs and share its rent by leasing it to any user.
As discussed in Chapter 11, due to the possibility of nonpredictable expenses relating to the
ownership of relevant leased assets and possible defaults, the returns could be quasi-fixed
and not absolutely fixed or unmodified when pegged to any benchmark. However, the returns
on most of the Sukuk are absolutely fixed or unmodified. This aspect carries systemic risk
of non-Shar ¯ı´ah-compliance, which nullifies the very basis of the Islamic financial system
and contravenes the investors’ aspiration based on their belief.
Sukuk originating from Sudan, Bahrain and other Middle Eastern countries are based
on Shirkah, Ijarah, Salam, Istisna‘a, Istisna‘a-cum-Ijarah or a pool of mixed assets. Such
Sukuk are acceptable to almost all of the Islamic scholars and banking experts, subject to
the fulfilment of minimal Shar ¯ı´ah essentials associated with underlying contracts.
15.3.5 Categories of Sukuk
Below we discuss various categories of Sukuk.
Muqaradah or Mudarabah Sukuk
Mudarabah or Muqaradah 10 Sukuk or deeds can be instrumental in enhancing public partici-
pation in investment activities in any economy. These are certificates that represent projects
or activities managed on the Mudarabah principle by appointing any of the partners or any
other person as Mudarib for management of the business. As regards the relationship between
the parties to the issue, the issuer of Mudarabah certificates is the Mudarib, subscribers are
the owners of the capital and the realized funds are the Mudarabah capital. The certificate
holders own the assets of the Mudarabah and the agreed upon share of the profits belongs
to the owners of capital and they bear the loss, if any.
In terms of the Resolution of the Islamic Fiqh Council of the OIC (fourth session, 1988),
the following are the salient features of Mudarabah Sukuk/certificates:
1. Mudarabah Sukuk (MS) represent common ownership and entitle their holders to a share
in the specific projects against which the MS have been issued.
2. The MS contract is based on the official notice of the issue or the prospectus, which must
provide all information required by Shar ¯ı´ah for a Qir ¯ad contract, such as the nature of
capital, the ratio for profit distribution and other conditions related to the issue, which
must be compatible with Shar ¯ı´ah.
3. The MS holder is given the right to transfer the ownership by selling the Sukuk in the
securities market at his discretion. The market value of Muqaradah Sukuk varies with the
business status and anticipated or expected profits of the concerned project. The sale of
MS must follow the rules listed below:
10 Muqaradah or Qir ¯ad have the same meaning as that of Mudarabah, as explained in Chapter 12 (in the part relating to Mudarabah).


----- p.399 (pdf 427) -----


Sukuk and Securitization 399
— if the Mudarabah capital is still in the form of money before the operation of the
specific project, the trading of MS will be like the exchange of money for money and
it must satisfy the rules of Bai‘ al Sarf; 11
— if the Mudarabah capital is in the form of debt, it must be based on the principles of
debt trading in Islamic jurisprudence;
— if the capital is in the form of a combination of cash, receivables, goods, real assets
and benefits, trade must be based on the market price evolved by mutual consent.
4. The manager/SPV who receives the funds collected from the subscribers to MS can also
invest his own funds. He will get a profit for his capital contribution in addition to his
share in the profit as Mudarib.
5. Neither prospectus nor MS should contain a guarantee, from the issuer or the manager
of the fund, for the capital or a fixed profit, or a profit based on any percentage of the
capital. Accordingly, (i) the prospectus, or the MS issued pursuant to it, may not stipulate
payment of a specific amount to the MS holder, (ii) profit is to be divided, as determined
by applying the rules of Shar ¯ı´ah; that is, an amount in excess of the capital, and not
the revenue or the yield, and (iii) the Profit and Loss Account of the project must be
published and disseminated to MS holders.
6. It is permissible to create reserves for contingencies, such as loss of capital, by deducting
from the profit a certain percentage in each accounting period.
7. The prospectus can also contain a promise made by a third party, totally unrelated to the
parties to the contract, in terms of legal entity or financial status, to donate a specific sum,
without any counter benefit, to meet losses in a given project, provided such commitment
is independent of the Mudarabah contract. However, it is not permissible for the issuer
to guarantee the capital of the Mudarabah. 12
IFIs can offer Mudarabah Sukuk or certificates to the investors who would subscribe and
participate in the investment transactions. The funds mobilized would be the variable capital
(class B share) of any bank to be marketed regionally through the selling of the issued
Mudarabah Sukuk.
Musharakah Sukuk
Musharakah is a mode which can serve as a basis for securitization easily, especially in
the case of big projects where huge amounts are required. Every subscriber is given a
Musharakah certificate, which represents his proportionate ownership in the assets of the
project. These are certificates of equal value issued for mobilizing funds to be used on
the basis of partnership, so that their holders become owners of the relevant project or
the asset as per their respective shares that are part of their asset portfolios. Musharakah
Sukuk can be issued as redeemable certificates by or to the corporate sector or to individuals
for their rehabilitation/employment, for the purchase of automobiles for their commercial
use or for the establishment of high-standard clinics, hospitals, factories, trading centres,
endowments, etc.
11 Bai‘ al Sarf refers to the exchange of gold, silver, monetary values/receivables or currencies; this has to be equal for equal and
simultaneous if the items of exchange are homogeneous, like gold for gold or US Dollar for US Dollar; and simultaneous if the
items being exchanged are heterogeneous, e.g. gold for silver or Pound for Dollar.
12 Council of the Islamic Fiqh Academy, 2000, pp. 61–66.


----- p.400 (pdf 428) -----


400 Understanding Islamic Finance
Musharakah redeemable Sukuk are almost similar to Mudarabah Sukuk. Therefore, basic
Shar¯ı´ah rules relating to Mudarabah also apply to Musharakah certificates. The only major
difference is that the intermediary party will be a partner of the group of subscribers
represented by a body of Musharakah certificate holders, in a manner similar to a joint stock
company.13
After the project is started, these Musharakah certificates can be treated as negotiable
instruments. Certificates based on Musharakah/Mudarabah can be bought and sold in the
secondary market, subject to the condition that the portfolio of Musharakah comprises
nonliquid assets valuing more than 50 %. Profit earned by the Musharakah is shared according
to an agreed ratio. Loss is shared on a pro rata basis. Whenever there is a combination of
liquid and nonliquid assets, it can be sold and purchased for an amount greater than the
amount of liquid assets in the combination or in the pool.
Investment Sukuk can be issued on a Musharakah basis to mobilize short-term deposits
for the development of long-term projects or for investment in general financial activities or
specific projects. The proceeds of the Sukuk can be used to buy and lease certain equipment
or for the construction of projects and factories, the expansion of projects or for working
capital finance. The Musharakah structure is considered more equitable and also safer for the
investors than the Mudarabah structure, as it involves both profit- and loss-sharing between
the fund manager and the Sukuk holders, not only profit-sharing. In addition, Musharakah
Sukuk holders will have added comfort and security from the cushion provided by the
manager’s participation in the Musharakah capital.
In Sudan, a number of assets of the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Sudan, Bank
of Khartoum, Nilain Bank and other public entities have been identified for the purpose
of securitization on a Musharakah basis. Instruments known as central bank Musharakah
certificates (CMCs) and government Musharakah certificates (GMCs) have been issued since
1998 for investors and are used in place of treasury bills and other interest-bearing securities
for open market operations and monetary management by the central bank. The CMCs are
sold (or bought) by the central bank through auctions and can be traded in the secondary
inter-bank market. 14
Ijarah Sukuk
The concept of Ijarah can be used for mobilizing funds for the development of long-
term infrastructure projects. This is possible through securitization of tangible assets such
as airports, roads, buildings, schools and hospitals and offering Sukuk to a large number
of institutional and individual investors. It is also possible to create a secondary market
instrument for financiers on the basis of Ijarah.
If a lessor, after executing an Ijarah contract, wishes to recover his cost of purchase of
the asset to get liquidity or for the purpose of profit, he can sell the leased asset wholly
or partly, either to one party or to a number of individuals. The purchase of proportion of
the asset can be evidenced by issuing certificates, which may be called Ijarah certificates or
Sukuk. The certificates must represent ownership of the pro rata undivided parts of the asset
with all related rights and obligations. Hence, Ijarah Sukuk are the securities representing
13 Homoud, 1998.
14 Ayub, 2002, pp. 128–131; Eltejani, 2005, pp. 411–413.


----- p.401 (pdf 429) -----


Sukuk and Securitization 401
ownership of well-defined and known assets tied up to a lease contract, rental of which is
the return payable to the Sukuk holders.
By virtue of flexibility in the rules of Ijarah, securitizing the Ijarah contracts is a key
factor for solving liquidity management problems and financing the public sector needs in
developing countries. Payment of Ijarah rentals can be unrelated to the period of taking
usufruct by the lessee, i.e. it can be made before the beginning of the lease period, during
the period or after the period, as the parties may mutually decide. This flexibility can be
used to evolve different forms of contracts and Sukuk that may suit different purposes of
issuers and investors.
If funds are raised through issuance of Sukuk for purchasing assets like buildings, motor
vehicles or other equipment for the purpose of leasing them out to their ultimate users, these
may be termed Ijarah funds. The ownership of the assets remains with the fund manager or
SPV and the rentals received from the users are distributed by the fund managers pro rata
among the subscribers. As discussed in detail in Chapter 12, most of the jurists are of the
view that such a fund cannot be created on the basis of Mudarabah, because Mudarabah,
according to them, is restricted to the sale of goods and does not extend to the business of
services and leases. However, in the Hanbali school, Mudarabah can be used in services and
also leases. This view is preferred by the majority of contemporary scholars.
Rental in Ijarah must be stipulated in clear terms for the first term of lease, and for future
renewable terms it could be constant, increasing or decreasing by benchmarking or relating
it to any well-known variable like the inflation rate, any periodically announced price index,
or otherwise by any settled percentage. The mainstream Shar ¯ı´ah experts have permitted
benchmarking with any interest rate reference, although it is not an ideal practice to them. 15
Governments can use Ijarah Sukuk as an alternative tool to interest-based borrowing,
provided they have durable assets useable in the process of performing government functions.
Use of assets by governments is necessary, while it does not matter whether these assets are
income-generating or not.
The following types of Sukuk can be issued on the concept of Ijarah:
1. Sukuk of ownership in leased assets. These are certificates of equal value that are issued
either by the owner of a leased asset or an asset to be leased (by promise), or by his
financial agent, with the aim of recovering the value of the asset through subscription.
The subscribers are buyers of the asset. The certificate holders become owners of the
asset jointly, with its benefits and risks.
2. Sukuk of ownership of usufruct of assets. Such certificates have various types, including
the following:
— Sukuk of ownership of usufructs of existing assets. These are documents of equal value
issued either by the owner of usufruct of an existing asset or a financial intermediary
acting on the owner’s behalf. The mobilized funds from subscription are the purchase
price of the usufructs, and the certificate holders become owners of the usufruct along
with the risks and rewards. It is permissible to trade in certificates of ownership of
usufructs of tangible assets prior to a contract of sub-leasing the assets. When the
assets are sub-leased, the certificate then represents the rent receivables, which makes
it a debt certificate. Therefore, in that case, the certificate is subject to the rules and
15 Usmani, 2000a, pp. 168–171.


----- p.402 (pdf 430) -----


402 Understanding Islamic Finance
requirements of debts. It is permissible for the issuer to redeem, either at the market
price or as agreed upon at the time of purchase, the Sukuk of ownership of usufruct
of tangible assets from the Sukuk holder after allocation of Sukuk and payment of
subscription amounts.
— Certificates of ownership of usufructs to be made available in the future as per
description. These are documents of equal value issued for the sake of leasing assets
that the lessor is liable to provide in the future, whereby the rental is recovered from
the subscription income, in which case the holders of the certificates become owners
of the usufruct of the future assets. The subscribers are buyers of usufructs and will
have both the risks and rewards. Such Sukuk can be traded after the asset is identified.
It is not valid to sub-lease or trade in usufructs of an asset to be made available prior
to identification of the asset, in which case trading must be carried out in line with
the rules of currency exchange. The trading rules in the case of sub-leasing of such
usufructs would be the same as those discussed above.
— Certificates of ownership of services of a specified supplier. These are documents of
equal value issued for the sake of providing or selling services through a specified
supplier (such as educational programmes in a particular university) and obtaining
the value in the form of subscription income, in which case the holders of the Sukuk
become owners of the services.
— Certificates of ownership of services to be made available in the future as per descrip-
tion. These are documents of equal value issued for the sake of providing or selling
services through a nonexisting supplier with the description of the subject matter
(such as educational programmes of a specific quality, schedule, duration, etc. with-
out mentioning the educational institution) and obtaining the value in the form of
subscription income, in which case the holders of the certificates become owners of
the services. 16
The following features may be kept in mind for securitization under Ijarah. It is necessary
for an Ijarah contract that the asset being leased and the amount of rent both are clearly
known to the parties at the time of the contract, and if both of these are known, Ijarah
can be contracted on an asset or a building that is yet to be constructed, as long as it is
fully described in the contract, provided that the lessor should normally be able to acquire,
construct or buy the asset being leased by the time set for its delivery to the lessee. The
lessor can sell the leased asset provided it does not hinder the lessee in taking benefit from
the asset. The new owner(s) will be entitled to receive the rentals for the remaining period.
Similarly, they can dispose of their share in the asset to the new owners individually or
collectively.
As an Ijarah certificate represents the holder’s proportionate ownership in the leased asset,
the holder will assume the rights and obligations of the owner/lessor to the extent of his
ownership. The holder will have the right to enjoy part of the rent according to his proportion
of ownership in the asset. In the case of total destruction of the assets, he will suffer the loss
to the extent of his ownership. So, it is essential that the Ijarah certificates are designed to
represent real ownership of the leased assets, and not only a right to receive the rent.
As per Shar ¯ı´ah rules, expenses related to the corpus or basic characteristics of the asset
are the responsibility of the owner, while maintenance expenses related to its operation
16 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, pp. 298–302.


----- p.403 (pdf 431) -----


Sukuk and Securitization 403
are to be borne by the lessee. Therefore, the expected return flow from such Sukuk may
not be completely fixed and predetermined. From this perspective, Ijarah Sukuk should be
taken as quasi-fixed return instruments in Islamic finance. There is one possibility that the
owner/lessor of the asset may assure the purchaser (SPV/Sukuk holder) about – performance
of the lessees, as in the case of IDB Trust. But if the asset is destroyed without any fault or
negligence of the lessee, the loss has to be borne by the lessor – the Sukuk holders.
It can be agreed between the parties that the rental should consist of two parts – one for
payment to the lessor and the other as an “on account” payment, to be held by the lessee for
any costs relating to ownership of the asset.
As regards the procedure for issuance of Ijarah Sukuk, an SPV is created to purchase
the asset(s), and this serves as a manager and issues Sukuk to the investors, enabling it to
make payment for purchasing the asset. The asset is then leased to the government or any
corporate body for its use. The lessee makes periodic rental payments to the SPV, which, in
turn, distributes the same among the Sukuk holders. As the lessor can stipulate the rental in
advance, the rental on Sukuk issue can be indicated in advance with the possibility of very
small variation that might be possible due to payment of ownership-related unpredictable
expenses by the lessor or the possibility of any default by the lessee.
Ijarah certificates can be negotiated and traded freely in the market and can serve as an
instrument easily convertible into cash. But, this should be after transfer of ownership to the
Sukuk holders, necessarily implying that the Sukuk represent real assets and not the monetary
capital, and that the holders have become owners of the assets (after which they can sell).
It is also permissible for the issuer to redeem, before maturity, certificates of ownership of
leased assets at the market price or at the price agreed upon between the certificate holder
and the issuer. Similarly, Ijarah Sukuk representing ownership of the usufruct of ascertained
assets can be traded prior to the contract of sub-leasing (because in that case they would
represent the monetary rent receivable).
Salam Securities/Sukuk
Salam is a contract in which advance payment of a price is made for goods to be delivered
later on. As per the AAOIFI Standard, a Salam purchase can onward sell the Salam com-
modity by another contract which is parallel to the first. In this case, the first and the second
contracts should be independent of each other. Specifications of the goods and delivery
dates of the two contracts may conform to each other, but both the contracts should be
independently enforceable.
Salam Sukuk are certificates of equal value issued for the sake of mobilizing capital that
is paid in advance in the shape of the price of the commodity to be delivered later. The
seller of the Salam commodity issues the certificates, while the subscribers are the buyers
of that commodity, i.e. they are the owners of the commodity when delivered. In the case
of Parallel Salam, the holders of Salam Sukuk are entitled to the Salam commodity or the
selling price at the time when the commodity is delivered.
Salam sale is attractive to the seller, whose cash flow is enhanced in advance, and to the
buyer, as the Salam price is normally lower than the prevailing spot price. The BMA, in
June 2001, developed Salam-based securities with LIBOR-related three-month tenures used
by Islamic banks for maintaining SLR. The Bahrain government sells aluminium to Bahrain
Islamic Bank (BIB), which has been nominated to represent the other banks wishing to
participate in the Salam contract. The government undertakes to supply a specified amount


----- p.404 (pdf 432) -----


404 Understanding Islamic Finance
of aluminium on the basis of Salam at a future date. At the same time, BIB appoints the
government its agent to market the aluminium at the time of delivery through its channels
of distribution at a price which provides a return to the security holders. Such short-term
Sukuk can be developed on the basis of commodities being heavily traded, like crude oil
and cotton, and the produce of big industrial projects having firm demand.
So far, secondary market trading of Salam Sukuk is considered impermissible on the
grounds that the certificates represent a share in the Salam debt, in which case they are
subject to the rules of debt trading. The issue needs further analysis in respect of reselling
the goods purchased under Salam before taking possession by the original buyer, especially
in the situation when he maintains inventory of that kind of goods, in which case banks
would be selling those goods out of the stock maintained by them without specifying any
units of the goods.
The Salam seller is bound to deliver the goods at the agreed date/time. The possibility
of a change in price of tangible goods during the Salam contract/the delivery period gives
rise to a business risk needed for getting a return through sale. Secondly, Salam deals have
been allowed as an exception from the general rule of not selling goods without having their
ownership and possession by dint of some conditions that are put in place to avoid excessive
Gharar in transactions. If it is allowed, the Salam Sukuk may be negotiable. The purchaser
of Sukuk would be the owner of the commodity to be delivered at the specified date and the
price of Sukuk would be determined by the market, depending upon the demand and supply
of the underlying commodity.
Istisna‘a Sukuk
Istisna‘a is a contractual agreement for manufacturing goods, allowing cash payment in
advance and future delivery or a future payment and future delivery of the goods man-
ufactured, as per the contract. It can be used for providing the facility of financing the
manufacture or construction of houses, plant, projects, bridges, roads and highways. By
way of a Parallel Istisna‘a contract with subcontractors, Islamic banks can undertake the
construction of any project/asset and its sale for a deferred price, and subcontract the actual
construction to any specialized firms.
In Istisna‘a, full ownership of the constructed item is immediately transferred upon delivery
of the item to the purchaser, against the deferred sale price that normally covers not only the
construction costs but also profits, which could legitimately include the cost of tying funds
for the duration of the repayment period. The payable deferred price can be documented
in the form of Sukuk (certificates of indebtedness), known as Istisna‘a Sukuk, which are
documents that carry equal value and are issued with the aim of mobilizing the funds required
for producing a certain item. The issuer of the certificates is the manufacturer (seller), while
the subscribers or certificate holders are the buyers of the item to be produced.
It is permissible to trade in or redeem Istisna‘a certificates if the funds have been converted
through business or trade into assets owned by certificate holders during the operation of
Istisna‘a, as the Sukuk represent properties that can be disposed of. If the realized funds
are immediately paid as a price in a Parallel Istisna‘a contract or the manufactured item is
submitted to the ultimate purchaser, then trading in Istisna‘a certificates is subject to the


----- p.405 (pdf 433) -----


Sukuk and Securitization 405
rules of disposing of debts. This is because the Sukuk represent a price that is a monetary
debt owed by the ultimate purchaser to the manufacturer. 17
The prohibition of Riba precludes the sale of these debt certificates to a third party at
any price other than their face value. Therefore, such certificates, which may be cashed
only on maturity, cannot have a secondary market. However, they can be transferred at face
value to a third party. Builders, big industrial concerns and wholesale suppliers can sell to
the IFIs certain assets on an Istisna‘a basis on deferred payment and issue Istisna‘a Sukuk
redeemable periodically according to their payment dates. The holders of Istisna‘a Sukuk
may acquire against them property or merchandise for a deferred price. Once acquired, such
property or merchandise can be disposed of in any manner. As indicated earlier in the book,
the deferred price of goods acquired against such certificates would be higher than the spot
price of the same goods. The certificate holder acquiring the goods now at higher than the
spot price is, in fact, relinquishing to the seller of the goods some (all, or even more) of the
price differential which the former obtained from the client above the construction cost of
the project he financed. This means that the market forces can play a role in encouraging or
curtailing the exchange of these certificates for goods. 18
Securitization on the Basis of Murabaha and Murabaha Sukuk
Any paper representing a monetary right or obligation arising out of a credit sale transaction
by banks cannot create a negotiable instrument. Therefore, Murabaha receivables cannot be
securitized for creating negotiable Sukuk to be traded in the secondary market. The purchaser
on credit in a Murabaha transaction signs a note or paper to evidence his indebtedness
towards the seller. That paper represents a debt receivable by the seller. Transfer of this
paper to a third party must be at par value and subject to the rules of Hawalah, meaning that
its assignment also has to be at face value. However, if a commodity has been purchased but
not yet sold, trading in certificates issued against it is allowed, as the certificates represent
the asset that can be traded.
A mixed portfolio consisting of a number of transactions, including Murabaha, may issue
negotiable certificates subject to certain conditions. For this purpose, the pool of the assets
should consist of Ijarah or other fixed assets valuing more than 50 % of its total worth.
However, if the Hanafi view is adopted, trading will be allowed even if the nonliquid assets
are more than 10 % of its total worth.
Murabaha Sukuk are more likely to be used in respect of purchases of goods by the
public sector. If the government needs items of huge price, it may purchase them through
credit sales by paying in instalments. The seller will amortize his cost and return (profit
margin) over the period of instalments. The government will issue certificates according to
the number of instalments. Each certificate having a maturity date will represent a property
right of the seller, which can change hands provided the amount of the claim does not change.
The seller or the original certificate holder can transfer his collection rights to another party,
subject to recourse to him against payment that would be equal to the face value of the
certificate minus the collection cost at the transferee’s end. Any “Murabaha funds” can also
issue Murabaha Sukuk, the proceeds of which could be used for sale of prespecified and
17 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, p. 311.
18 Al-Bashir and Al-Amine, 2001.


----- p.406 (pdf 434) -----


406 Understanding Islamic Finance
general assets on the basis of Murabaha to give a quasi-fixed return to the Murabaha Sukuk
holders.
Arcapita Bank B.S.C (Bahrain) issued five-year multicurrency Murabaha-backed Sukuk
in 2005 with a five-year bullet maturity. The proceeds of the Sukuk are used for sale and
purchase of assets via a series of commodity Murabaha transactions. As Murabaha may
yield a fixed return, the Sukuk holders have been offered a return equivalent to three-month
LIBOR + 175 bps. The SPV will have full recourse to Arcapita and, therefore, the Sukuk
are a freely transferable instrument on the basis of a mechanism approved by Arcapita’s
Shar¯ı´ah supervisory board. It is presumed that the SPV will be maintaining a sufficient
amount of inventory or fixed assets, making its Sukuk negotiable.
Mixed Portfolio Securities/Sukuk
Banks may securitize a pool of Musharakah, Ijarah and some Murabaha, Salam, Istisna‘a,
and Ju‘alah (a contract for performing a given task against a prescribed fee in a given period)
contracts. The return/risk on such securities depends on the chosen mix of the contracts.
A prominent example of such mixed portfolio Sukuk are IDB’s Solidarity Trust Sukuk for
US$ 400 million issued in 2003. Salient features of IDB Solidarity Trust Sukuk are given
below.
Solidarity Trust Services (STS) served as trustee to issue the fixed-rate trust certificates
that were issued to purchase a portfolio of Sukuk assets comprising Ijarah, Murabaha and
Istisna‘a contracts originated by the IDB. Each certificate represented an undivided beneficial
ownership in trust assets and ranked pari passu with other trust certificates. Most of the
assets (over 50 %) would, at all times during the period, comprise Ijarah assets. If, at any
time, the proportion of assets evidenced by Ijarah contracts fell below 25 %, a dissolution
event would occur, and IDB, by virtue of its separate undertaking, would be obliged to
purchase all of the assets owned by the trustee pursuant to the terms of the “purchase
undertaking deed”. Profit on Sukuk assets, net of expenses of the trust, would be used to
give a periodic return to the certificate holders. Certificates would be redeemed at 100 % of
their principal value. In the case of any early dissolution event, the redemption would be
according to adjustment, keeping in mind the return accumulation period. Principal amounts
of Sukuk would be reinvested in Ijarah and Musharakah contracts to form a part of Sukuk
assets.
On the basis of a separate undertaking, IDB has guaranteed payments in respect of assets
owed by the trustee by reference to the schedule of payments given by IDB at the time of
sale of assets to the trustee. Certificate holders will not have any recourse for payment of
any amount in respect of certificates in case the trust assets are exhausted.
As such, IDB’s guarantee (for the rate on the certificates) does not comprise a guarantee
of payments in respect of the trust certificates, but represents a guarantee, inter alia ,o ft h e
amount scheduled as being payable by the obligors of the underlying transactions in respect
of the assets. In the case of any shortfall in return on the Sukuk assets, the IDB has agreed
to meet the shortfall. IDB has also agreed to provide an interest-free facility to the STS to
ensure timely payment of any periodic distribution amounts on the trust certificates. Thus,
the ability of the trust to pay the due on certificates ultimately depends on IDB.
On the basis of the “purchase undertaking deed” between IDB and the trust, the IDB will
purchase the Sukuk assets on the earlier of the maturity date or the dissolution date. The
proceeds will be distributed by the trust among the certificate holders, who will periodically
receive a fixed rate of return net of any withholding or any other taxes.


----- p.407 (pdf 435) -----


Sukuk and Securitization 407
Under Islamic banking principles, IDB has to retain the risk of default on the Sukuk
assets sold to the trust. As such, it is an unconditional and irrevocable guarantor to provide
liquidity to the trust to cover costs and expenses, periodic distribution payments and the
principal amount of investment to Sukuk holders. A flow-chart of IDB Trust Sukuk is given
in Figure 15.2.
Investors/Subscriber
Trust
Certificate
Solidarity Trust Services
SPV/Trustee
ICD Buys Trust
Assets from IDB
and sells to SPV
IDB originator of
Trust Assets
ICD Wakil
Appointed by
SPV
IDB Guarantor
Proceeds to IDB from sale
of assets
Proceeds to ICD from sale
of assetsTransfer of ownership of
Trust assets to SPV
Transfer of ownership of
Trust assets to ICD
Distributions from Trust
Assets
Proceeds from investors who
secure the certificates
Figure 15.2 Flow diagram of IDB mixed portfolio Sukuk issue, 2003
The modus operandi of issuing mixed portfolio Sukuk is an effective tool for converting
nonmarketable and illiquid assets to negotiable instruments having a secondary market,
particularly suitable for investment banks and DFIs.
15.3.6 Tradability of Sukuk
Sukuk representing tangible assets or usufruct of such assets can be traded in the secondary
market, depending upon the quality, risk and profitability of the securitized assets. Tradability
is a highly important feature that has to be kept in mind while issuing Sukuk as well as
for making investment. A deciding factor in this regard is whether the Sukuk create any
debt obligations or they represent an ownership stake in the underlying assets or project;
in the former case, the certificate will not be tradable, while in the latter case, it will be
negotiable/tradable. As discussed above in the case of various categories of Sukuk in the
light of the AAOIFI Standard, the Shar ¯ı´ah position of their trading in the secondary market
is given in Box 15.3.


----- p.408 (pdf 436) -----


408 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 15.3: Tradability of Sukuk in the Secondary Market 19
Mudarabah/Musharakah certificates or
Sukuk
Tradable at market price after the
commencement of the activity for which the
funds were raised.
Ijarah Sukuk based on freehold existing
assets
Tradable at market price.
Ijarah Sukuk of existing assets subject to
head lease
Tradable at market price or at a rate agreed
upon at the date of redemption.
Ijarah Sukuk based on future tangible
assets
Tradable at market price only after the asset is
ascertained and leased.
Sukuk based on existing specified
services
Tradable prior to sub-leasing of such services.
Sukuk based on described future services Tradable at market price only after the source of
the service is ascertained.
Salam Sukuk Not tradable except at the face value.
Istisna‘a Sukuk Tradable if funds converted into assets and
before sale to the orderer.
Sukuk issued on Mudarabah basis for
Murabaha sales – Murabaha Sukuk
Tradable before sale of the goods to the
end-buyer or if receivables (if inventory is
maintained) are less than 50 %; after sale of the
goods and without inventory of more than 50 %,
tradable only at face value with recourse.
Box 15.4: Prominent Sukuk Issues in Various Countries 20
Name of Sukuk Type Amount Period Pricing
Malaysian Global First Corporate US$ 150M 5 years Floating rate on
underlying Ijarah
IFC Wawasan Ringgit
Sukuk (Bai‘ bil
Thamanal Ajil)
Corporate US$ 132M 3 years Fixed, 2.82 %
Malaysian Global Ijarah
Sukuk
Sovereign US$ 500M 7 years Floating, LIBOR-related
Qatar Global Ijarah Sukuk Sovereign US$ 700M 7 years 0.4 % above LIBOR
Tabreed Global Ijarah
Sukuk
Corporate US$ 100M 5 years Fixed, 6 %
Sukuk Al Intifaa Makkah Corporate US$ 390M 24 years Sale of usufruct rights as
weekly time shares
Ijarah Sukuk
Saxony-Anhalt
Germany
Sovereign Euro 100M 5 years 1 basis point over
6-month EURIBOR
Dubai – Civil Aviation
(DCA) Ijarah Sukuk
Corporate US$ 750M 5 years Floating reference rate
on underlying Ijarah
19 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Investment Certificates (No. 17), clause 5/2.
20 Web sites of LMC (http://www.lmcbahrain.com) and respective entities.


----- p.409 (pdf 437) -----


Sukuk and Securitization 409
Sitara Musharakah Term
Finance
Corporate Pak Rs. 360M 5 years Shirkah-based profit/loss
Solidarity Trust
Certificates IDB
Corporate US$ 400M 5 years Based on performance of
mixed portfolio, IDB guar-
antee
Bahrain Monetary Agency
(BMA)
Sovereign US$ 100M 5 years Fixed, 4.25 %
GoB – BMA Sovereign US$ 70M 3 years Fixed, 4 %
BMA Sovereign US$ 80M 5 years Fixed, 4 %
BMA Sovereign US$ 50M 3 years Fixed, 3 %
BMA Sovereign US$ 80M 3 years Fixed, 3 %
BMA Sovereign US$ 100M 5 years Fixed, 3.75 %
BMA Sovereign US$ 250M 5 years 0.6 % above LIBOR
BMA Sovereign US$ 200M 5 years Floating rate reference
BMA Sovereign US$ 106M 10 years Fixed, 5.125 %
1st Islamic Investment
Bank, Bahrain
Corporate US$ 75M 3 years LIBOR-related
Malaysia Global Ijarah Sovereign US$ 600M 5 years 0.95 % above LIBOR
Dubai Civil Aviation
Sukuk
Sovereign US$ 1000M 5 years Fixed
Durrat Real Estate Sukuk Sovereign US$ 120M 5 years 1.25 % above LIBOR
Sarawak Ijarah Sukuk Sovereign US$ 350M 5 years 1.25 % above LIBOR
Nakheel Sukuk Corporate US$ 3.52B 3 years 1.20 % above LIBOR
Ijarah Sukuk, Pakistan Sovereign US$ 600M 5 years 2.20 % above LIBOR
15.3.7 Issues in Terms and Structures of Sukuk
Notwithstanding the exceptional growth of Sukuk in the last five years, there are some
concerns that have to be taken care of for more vigorous and sustained support for the
emerging financial system. The first and foremost crucial issue is that of conclusively pre-
fixed rates of return in almost all Sukuk, in some cases even without any provision for third
party guarantee. Profit rates in deferred-payment Murabaha and rentals in Ijarah are no doubt
fixed, but while there could be default in receipt of Murabaha receivables, in leases there is
the possibility both of ownership-related expenses and default in receipt of the due rental.
The loss of the cost of funds that cannot be recovered under Islamic finance and expenses
that could be incurred by the lessor as owner of the leased asset may not make it possible
to give a return to Sukuk holders that is fixed and guaranteed in all respects. This concern
is particularly genuine in respect of sovereign Sukuk, as a guarantee by the sovereign itself
may give rise to doubts about Shar ¯ı´ah compliance. Payment of rental is guaranteed in the
main contract itself in the form of a contractual obligation on sovereigns to pay the rent.
In this regard, the general public interested in Islamic finance and practitioners need to be
educated about the flexibilities and the limits of each mode/product so that the integrity of
the system is not damaged. The Shar ¯ı´ah scholars are unanimous that any pre-fixed return
or guarantee of the investment by any of the partners in contractual Shirkah-based modes
is not acceptable. According to the AAOIFI’s Standard on Sukuk, a prospectus to issue any
certificates (not only those which are Shirkah-based) must not contain any clause that the
issuer is liable to compensate certificate holders up to the nominal value in situations other
than torts and negligence, or that he guarantees a fixed percentage of profit. (An independent
third party can, however, provide such a guarantee free of charge and subject to relevant


----- p.410 (pdf 438) -----


410 Understanding Islamic Finance
conditions).21 But the way in which various Sukuk are structured and marketed tends to
assure the subscribers/holders that the issue carries a fixed return rate, like any fixed income
security in the conventional interest-based structure.
One view is that the financier partner can give a part of its own profit or even out of its
own wallet to the client partners, as in the case of deposits kept on the basis of Mudarabah.
But even there the banks are not free; they can accommodate the clients up to the limit of
a pre-agreed ratio only and any arrangement of payment of an agreed amount of profit out
of the banks’ own income may dilute the sanctity of the institution of Shirkah, particularly
when adopted as a system. In the case of Sukuk, even this is not possible and the SPVs have
to distribute among the Sukuk holders the net proceeds of the business in which the raised
funds have been used.
Ijarah has flexibility in the sense that the rental rate can be fixed or floating and the lessor
may know in advance his future expected receipts. But the lessor is exposed to losing rental
collection when the lessee fails in timely payment. He may also lose his property because
of both systematic and unsystematic risks. So, how can Sukuk holders be given a guarantee
of investment and assured of a fixed income? One possibility is that the owner/lessor of
the asset may assure the purchaser of the asset (while selling it to the SPV) about the
performance of the lessees, as in the case of IDB Trust Sukuk issued on the basis of a mixed
portfolio of assets booked by the IDB. In the case of Murabaha or other receivables, the SPV
may have recourse to the institution that has undertaken the underlying transactions. It seems
pertinent that the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars may explain the limits within which such guarantee or
assurance can be given, particularly in respect of future assets to be leased by the SPV. If
the asset is destroyed without any fault or negligence of the lessee, the risk has to be borne
by the lessor – Sukuk holders. They may also like to clarify how the requirement of taking
up the ownership-related risks would be fulfilled if Ijarah Sukuk holders were guaranteed a
fixed return on their investment, as in the case of conventional securities.
Another important issue is that a number of contracts are combined in one arrangement
of Sukuk issue in such a way that they are interdependent on one another. The Ijarah Sukuk
issue with a sale and lease-back arrangement involves about six agreements. If these are
made integral parts of the main contract, Shar ¯ı´ah compliance is at stake. Sequencing of these
agreements, which has a bearing on Shar ¯ı´ah compliance, also needs to be taken care of.
Further, it has been observed that most of the issues lack transparency in respect of
documentation and rights and liabilities of various parties to the issue. Proper care of all
the aspects and transparency would lend enhanced credibility to the concept of Sukuk and
widen the Islamic finance market. According to the AAOIFI’s Standard, a prospectus of any
issue must include all contractual conditions, rights and obligations of various parties and the
party covering the loss, if any. The Shar ¯ı´ah boards should not only approve the procedure
of the issue but also monitor the implementation of the project throughout its duration. This
necessarily includes matters relating to the distribution of profit, trade and redemption of the
certificates.22
A related point of concern is that of reliance on Ijarah Sukuk only; the potential of
Shirkah-based or even mixed portfolio Sukuk is not being properly realized. Most of the
Sukuk issued for public sector financing are not based on the best possible structures of
21 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Investment Certificates, clause 5/1/8/7; see also clause 6/7 of Standard No. 5 on Guarantees.
22 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Investment Certificates, clause 5/1/8.


----- p.411 (pdf 439) -----


Sukuk and Securitization 411
Islamic finance. Salam Sukuk in Bahrain and some Shirkah-related certificates in Sudan
are the only exceptions. Experience of Shirkah-based certificates of investment issued by
corporate bodies has proved their suitability and profitability. Further, the procedures of
Ijarah Sukuk issues need some refinement in consultation with a team of Shar ¯ı´ah scholars.
15.3.8 Potential of Sukuk in Fund Management and Developing the Islamic
Capital Market
Sukuk, a by-product of the fast-growing Islamic finance industry, have confirmed their
viability in mobilization of resources and their effective use for the benefit of both investors
and the fund users. Their growth is attributable to a number of factors, including, among
others, their potential for liquidity and fund management. They could also be used as a tool
for monetary policy and open market operations. As is the case in Sudan, central banks can
issue Sukuk for the purpose of controlling liquidity. 23
Previously, IFIs had to rely on Tawarruq and Murabaha-based dealings in the international
metals market and equity markets for the purpose of short-term and medium- to long-term
fund and cash management respectively. The modus operandi of the transactions in the
metals market was not fully acceptable to the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars, as the Murabaha conditions
were not accomplished in letter and spirit. The emergence of Sukuk in general since 2001,
and IjarahSukuk in particular, and that of the market makers and servicers facilitates IFIs
in short-term fund placements in a Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant manner. Due to a shortage in supply
of such instruments vis-à-vis their demand, Sukuk were tightly held until the recent past,
resulting in the absence of a secondary market. Lately, the position has eased and active
trading has started. The average volume of trading in PCFC Sukuk has been $10 million a
day since their launch. 24 An active secondary market dealing in Nakheel Sukuk just after
their issue in December 2006 also points to a healthy signal in this regard.
According to Sameer Abdi of Ernst & Young, about one-third of investors in countries
with a Muslim majority are seeking Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant products; another 50–60 % would
use products conforming to Shar ¯ı´ah tenets if they were commercially competitive. At the
company level, a large number of businesses and institutions in the world, where Shar ¯ı´ah-
compliant products are available, particularly in the Middle East, are shifting to public
vehicles offering Shar¯ı´ah-compliant solutions to financial problems. This confirms the huge
potential of Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant certificates of investment.
In a Sukuk issue of $800 million from Abu Dhabi Investment Bank that closed on
December 4, 2006, nearly 40 % of the investors came from Europe. In the Nakheel Sukuk
issue of $3.52 billion also, 40 % of investors are from Europe. A number of European and
Japanese corporations are planning to explore the Sukuk market for raising long-term funds.
A huge amount of funds is needed for infrastructure projects in the Muslim world, and
if managed properly and carefully without compromising on the Shar ¯ı´ah principles, this
can not only be arranged through the vehicle of Sukuk, but also it could be a stepping
stone for broad-based development of these economies. This requires developing Islamic
countries to increasingly use the vehicle of Sukuk for financing their infrastructure and other
development projects.
23 See Eltejani, 2005, pp. 411–413.
24 The Economist , December 9th–15th, 2006, p. 73.


----- p.412 (pdf 440) -----


412 Understanding Islamic Finance
The development of Sukuk depends on factors like a proper regulatory framework, Shar¯ı´ah
compliance and convergence, the development of market professionals, investors’ education
and knowledge-sharing.
15.4 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
Sukuk provide a tremendous potential for growth in the global Islamic capital market that
is critical for the sustained development of the Islamic finance industry. Their emergence
has attracted a large number of investors across the world. Sukuk create a framework for
participation of a large number of people in financing projects in the public and private
sectors, including those of infrastructure, such as roads, bridges, ports, airports, etc. A variety
of target-specific Sukuk can be issued on the basis of various modes, keeping in mind the
relevant Shar ¯ı´ah rules. The return on the Sukuk depends on the income realized by the
underlying assets/projects. Sukuk issue requires appropriate enabling laws to protect the
interests of investors and issuers, appropriate accounting standards, study of the targeted
market, monitoring of standardized contracts, appropriate flow of financial data to investors
and provision of a standard quality service to customers at large.
Islamic banks’ credibility is a very fragile issue, especially in countries such as the GCC
states and Pakistan. The role of Shar ¯ı´ah scholars is crucial in this regard; anything to do
with the Shar ¯ı´ah should be the exclusive domain of the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars, who are careful
and responsible enough to find solutions to financial problems without compromising on the
tenets of the Shar ¯ı´ah.
The international institutions set up during the last decade to lend the Islamic finance
industry a global acceptance, namely the Bahrain-based LMC, IIFM and IIRA, have to do a
lot to make Islamic capital markets increasingly active and efficient. They have to lead the
industry players to exploit the potential of Shirkah-based Sukuk, as reliance on Ijarah Sukuk
alone, as has been witnessed over the last few years, may not be sufficient to realize the secu-
ritization potential of the industry as a whole. It may not be able to generate the sustainable
support critically needed for realization of the market potential. 25 The creation of Islamic
universal Sukuk, structured by IIFM as SPV, fulfilling the Shar ¯ı´ah essentials of Ijarah could
serve as a basis to promote cooperation among Muslim countries and their financial markets.
Box 15.5: DP World’s Nakheel Sukuk
Initial offering – US$ 2.5 billion
Final offering – US$ 3.52 billion (amount raised by US$ 1.02 billion)
Financial institutions involved – Barclays Capital and Dubai Islamic Bank as joint
lead managers and joint bookrunners for the offering
Listed on – Dubai International Financial Exchange
Sukuk teno r – 3 years
Structure – Sale and lease-back (convertible)
Pricing – LIBOR + 120 basis points
25 Adam, 2005, pp. 371–400.


----- p.413 (pdf 441) -----


Sukuk and Securitization 413
Investors’ Profile
Around 100 accounts were allocated notes, of which 38 % were from the Middle
East, 40 % from Europe and 22 % from the rest of the world. By type, 55 % of the deal
went to banks, 35 % to both fixed-income and convertible funds and the remainder to
asset managers and wealthy individuals.
The bonds will continue until maturity in 2009. There is an extensive security
package featuring a mortgage on land, a pledge on shares in the operating company
and a guarantee from Nakheel’s parent company, Dubai World.
Box 15.6: Ijarah Sukuk Offering by the Government of Pakistan
President of Pakistan
for and on behalf
of Pakistan
The National
Highway Authority 
of Pakistan
Investors
Pakistan International
Sukuk Company
Limited
Distribution
Re
de
mp
tio
n
Ca
sh Certificates
Rentals
Purchase
of
Highway
Land
Lease of
Highway Land
Purchase 
Price
Exercise
Price
Sale of
Highway Land
upon
dissolution (1)
Pakistan’s first ever Islamic Sukuk, worth USD 600 million, were launched in Jan-
uary 2005. Pakistan International Sukuk Company Limited (PIS) bought highway
land (M-2 motorway) from the National Highway Authority and issued the trust cer-
tificates. The Sukuk issue was assigned a B + rating by Standard & Poor’s Rating
Services.
Issue structure
An SPV was created – Pakistan International Sukuk Company Limited – wholly owned
by the government of Pakistan. The property in collateral is the M-2 motorway.
The offer
• the offer attracted orders from 82 accounts worth USD 1200 million, of which USD
600 million were accepted;
• sold at par to yield 220 basis points above six-month LIBOR.


----- p.414 (pdf 442) -----


414 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 15.6: Continued
Transaction structure
• Pakistan International Sukuk Company Limited bought highway land (M-2 motor-
way) from the National Highway Authority and issued the trust certificates;
• the land was then leased to the government of Pakistan for a period corresponding
to the tenor of the trust certificates;
• the government of Pakistan is making periodic payments under lease agreements
to PIS to pay off periodic liabilities arising on the trust certificates;
• on completion of the term, the government of Pakistan will repurchase the land
from PIS at an agreed price, enabling it to redeem the Sukuk.
Box 15.7: Ijarah Sukuk Issue by WAPDA, Pakistan
The Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA), is an autonomous body
working for the development of water and hydel power in the country. It needed
finance to enhance its power-generating capacity, which it did through the issuance
of local currency Ijarah Sukuk. An SPV, “WAPDA First Sukuk Co” (WFS) was
formed, which purchased from WAPDA ten power generation turbines installed at
Mangla Hydel Power Station for lease back to WAPDA for seven years. Rentals are
benchmarked against the Karachi Interbank Offer Rate (KIBOR).
WAPDA pays semiannual rental to WFS to pay periodic rental to the Sukuk holders.
At the end of the lease term, WAPDA will purchase the underlying assets by fulfilling
its unilateral undertaking to purchase the turbines. This will enable WFS to pay back
the investment amounts to the Sukuk holders.
The payment obligation of WAPDA under the WAPDA Sukuk issue is guaranteed by
the government of Pakistan, this characteristic has made them eligible for maintaining
a statutory liquidity requirement (SLR) by Islamic banks. The transaction structure, in
brief, is:
Rental rate: 6 months KIBOR + 35 bps
Principal amount: PKR 8000 million
Underlying asset: WAPDA’s ten Mangla Hydel power generation units
Issuance format: privately placed LCY floating-rate notes
Specific feature: Sukuk eligible for maintaining SLR.
Box 15.8: Case Study of Hanco Fleet Securitization (Saudi Arabia)
Issue structure
Principal amount: USD 27 200 000
Periodic distribution: 6 %
Tenor: 3 years


----- p.415 (pdf 443) -----


Sukuk and Securitization 415
Issuance format: privately placed LCY fixed-rate notes
Issuer: two-tier SPV/SPC
Underlying assets: motor fleet.
A two-tier special purpose vehicle/special purpose company (SPV/ SPC) structure was
established to issue Sukuk certificates, where the SPC was incorporated in a foreign
country because of stringent Saudi laws.
Transaction structure
• the SPC issues Sukuk certificates and proceeds are used by the SPV to fund the
purchase of assets from the originator;
• the SPV owns the assets and allows an agent to manage the assets. The SPV
forwards all cash flows into an off-shore bank account, managed by the SPC;
• in the case of lack of cash flow to fulfil the payment flow obligations, this bank
account is used to meet the obligations;
• the SPC pays the certificate holders and, at maturity, sells the assets to fund the
redemption of certificate holders.


----- p.416 (pdf 444) -----




