
----- p.417 (pdf 445) -----


16
Takaful: An Alternative
to Conventional Insurance
16.1 INTRODUCTION
Insurance has become a need of businesses and individuals for mitigating risks and losses
and lessening the impact of catastrophes on their lives and wealth. Financial institutions also
have to take out insurance cover to safeguard against losses. When Islamic banking started
functioning in the 1970s, it also required a Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant alternative to conventional
insurance, considered against the Shar ¯ı´ah tenets due to the involvement of Riba, Gharar
and gambling. To fill the gap in the cycle of Islamic finance, the system of Takaful has
been developed and a large number of Takaful companies are providing services in various
regions of the world.
In this chapter we shall briefly discuss the reasons why conventional insurance is frowned
upon, the need for and evolution of Takaful, the Shar ¯ı´ah basis and features of Takaful,
various models of Takaful, the status, opportunities and the challenges facing the Takaful
industry. Giving details about the technicalities and working of the Takaful industry is not
the objective. As the nature of business of banking and Takaful is different, and bankers are
mostly not involved in Takaful business, the purpose of this chapter is only to introduce the
reader to the main features of the Takaful system that is compliant with the Shar ¯ı´ah tenets.
16.2 THE NEED FOR TAKAFUL COVER
All human beings are exposed to risks in respect of their lives and belongings. Man is
required by instinct, and as such has always strived, to safeguard himself from the risks and
hazards to his life and property. As human society developed and business grew, this instinct
took the form of the business of life and general insurance. Today, the insurance industry
has become a necessary part of business and part and parcel of the financial system. 1
However, Muslim societies in general have been avoiding commercial insurance, mainly
for two reasons. First, it has been considered unnecessary, as members of a Muslim society
are required to help each other, particularly the victims of any misfortune. Hence, some
arrangements to help traders and other communities have been in existence in Muslim
societies for centuries. Many people believe that true belief in Allah and destiny means there
is no need for any such cover against death or losses to a man himself or his wealth. Things
happen with the will and order of God and to get insurance against them is considered to
1 Insurance products are mainly of two categories: life insurance and general insurance. The latter has three main branches: marine,
fire and accident (as in the case of motor vehicles, aeroplanes, etc.); life insurance is broadly classified into whole life policies and
endowment policies. While whole life policies promise the face value of the policy whenever the insured dies, endowment policies
are confined to limited periods.


----- p.418 (pdf 446) -----


418 Understanding Islamic Finance
be questioning His actions. Second, the severe prohibition of Riba, Gharar and gambling
are believed to indicate the nonpermissibility of conventional insurance. Further, insurance
companies are involved in other forbidden businesses, including alcohol, pork, indecent
entertainment and hotels with clubs and prohibited activities.
While the second reason is genuine and must be observed in order to avoid prohibitions,
the first is only a myth. All human beings are invariably exposed to the likelihood of meeting
catastrophes and disasters, giving rise to misfortune and suffering such as death, loss of
limbs, accident, destruction of business or wealth, etc. Notwithstanding the belief in Allah
and destiny, Islam provides that one must find ways and means to avoid such catastrophe
and disaster wherever possible, and to lighten one’s or one’s family’s burden should such
an event occur.
Shar¯ı´ah intends to save human beings from hardship. The Holy Qur´ ¯an says: “Allâh
intends for you ease, and He does not want to make things difficult for you.” (2: 185). It
further says: “Allah wishes to lighten (the burden) for you, and man was created weak” (4:
28). One day the holy Prophet (pbuh) saw a person leaving a camel in the jungle, he asked
him: “Why don’t you tie down your camel?” He answered: “I put my trust in Allah.” The
Prophet said: “Tie your camel first, then put your trust in Allah.”
The idea of getting cover against risks is not intrinsically bad. In the case of genuine
problems and remaining within the main Shar ¯ı´ah constraints, the rule of necessity comes
into play to find the proper solutions. Therefore, the scholars deemed it necessary to develop
a scheme or system enabling human beings to avoid misfortune and lessen the losses in a
manner not against the principles of the Shar ¯ı´ah.
The insurance business is conducted mostly by non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs)
and the commercial banks are not allowed, in most countries, to be involved in the insurance
business. However, all commercial and investment banks and other NBFIs have to resort to
insurance services, either as a regulatory requirement or as an unavoidable business need.
Similarly, business, industry and individuals have been increasingly taking on the services
of insurance companies to safeguard against unfortunate incidents and losses to life and
wealth. While Islamic banking emerged in the 1960s and early 1970s, Islamic insurance
started no earlier than 1979. This reveals that the Takaful system developed in response to
demand for risk cover by Islamic financial institutions, due mainly to the fact that banking
and insurance go hand-in-hand and complement each other’s operations. However, it may
also have positive implications for those individuals, households and businesses who have
been avoiding insurance on the basis of belief.
16.2.1 Why Conventional Insurance is Prohibited
As indicated above, efforts to avoid risk are not against the Shar ¯ı´ah tenets. Belief in God or
destiny does not mean that man should be exposed to unnecessary risks, and Shar ¯ı´ah accepts
the basic safety requirement of human beings and their belongings. This includes protection
of self, protection of one’s offspring and wealth, protection against disease, illiteracy and
poverty and other misfortune. Why, then, is conventional insurance not acceptable in the
structure of Islamic finance?
Marine insurance was the first form of commercial insurance, initiated probably at the
end of the 12th century. It took the form of a formal system in the 17th century, when
the marine business developed on a massive scale. Among the Islamic jurists, Ibn Abdin, a
widely respected jurist of the 19th century, was the first scholar who wrote about modern


----- p.419 (pdf 447) -----


Takaful: An Alternative to Conventional Insurance 419
commercial insurance in detail and particularly discussed the marine insurance of his time;
but he did not approve it from the Shar ¯ı´ah point of view.
Different views have been expressed about the Shar ¯ı´ah status of conventional insurance. 2
The difference of opinion has arisen for two reasons: one, jurists who did not know the
details and complexities involved in various forms of insurance and its structure were asked
to issue edicts without sufficiently explaining the background and perspective of the issues
involved, and two, there is no direct reference to practices like insurance in the Holy Qur´ ¯an
and Sunnah. As Islamic economics and finance developed, Shar ¯ı´ah scholars gained more
and more knowledge and, hence, it became easy for them to analyse the system proactively.
As a result, an overwhelming majority of the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars have come to the conclusion
that commercial insurance is unlawful due to the involvement of Riba (interest), Qim ¯ar and
Maisir (gambling), Gharar (excessive uncertainty) and the invalid transfer of risk from the
insured to the insurer. As a whole, it contains the element of temptation and cheating and is
incompatible with the natural and ethical methods of earning money.
Riba is involved in conventional insurance both directly and indirectly: an excess on one
side in the case of exchange between the amount of premiums and the sum insured is the direct
involvement of Riba, while investment in interest-based businesses by the insurer refers to the
indirect involvement of the policyholder in Riba-based transactions. If a claim is not made in
non-life policies, the insurance company keeps almost the whole amount. There is a loss of
premiums in the case of cancellation of a life insurance policy by the policyholder, while only
a proportional refund is made if the insurance company terminates the cover.
Gharar means Khatar and uncertainty about the subject matter and the price and the
rights and liabilities of parties in commutative contracts and also involves Maisir and Qim ¯ar.
Khatar refers to stipulating transfer of ownership of a property or profitability in a deal where
commercial benefit is involved on both sides for any uncertain event. Hence, Khatar/Gharar
would be found if the liability of any of the parties to a contract was uncertain or contingent;
delivery of one of the exchange items was not in the control of any party, or the payment from
one side was uncertain. Qim ¯ar is found in a deal if the profit of one party is dependent on
the loss of the other. It also involves Maisir, which means any deal in which monetary gains
come from mere chance, speculation and conjecture and not from work, taking responsibility
or real sector business.
Conventional insurance involves Khatar as a policyholder enters into a business deal in
which his liability and the right both remain contingent. He loses the amount given as
premium if the event of insurance does not occur, as in the case of general insurance. The
insurer (company) does not know how much he will owe to the insured. In many cases, an
insured also does not know how much he will pay ultimately to the insurer. In life policies,
a policyholder has generally to lose all premiums that he has paid if he cancels his policy
within the first two or three years of the contract.
The insurer receives premiums and undertakes to fulfil the loss or damage to life or
property of the insured. It is either in surplus or in deficit if the claims are less or higher than
the premiums received, respectively. This becomes a monetary or commercial transaction in
which the insurer owns an underwriting surplus (UWS) or underwriting loss (UWL). 3
2 For different views on insurance, see Khorshid, 2004, pp. 12–15, 60–78; Fatawah in respect of insurance/Takaful are given
(without text) in the appendix to this chapter.
3 UWS means the net amount of money which the insurer gets from the premiums paid by the policyholders after payments of
the claims, if any. Conversely, UWL is the amount of money which the insurer has to pay in the form of claims in excess of the
premiums received from the policyholders.


----- p.420 (pdf 448) -----


420 Understanding Islamic Finance
Any of the parties gains at the cost of the other. The hope of “chance profit” or gain motivates
the taking of risk, the feature which makes the insurance contract a money stake or a gamble.
It is pertinent to keep in view in this regard that Gharar, or uncertainty, is prohibited when it is
involved in commercial/commutative contracts. As conventional insurance is a commutative
contract, any involvement of uncertainty would invalidate the contract.
At the present stage of human life, individuals, businesses and societies cannot afford
to avoid such cover against losses to business. The only requirement is that the elements
prohibited by the Shar ¯ı´ah are excluded from any such scheme. Hence, an Islamic alternative
to insurance was urgently required to fill the gap in Islamic finance. In many cases it is
a legal requirement that assets underlying Islamic banking contracts have to be insured,
as in the case of auto Ijarah, storage, shipment and transportation of goods, etc. Further,
Islamic banks’ clients criticized the involvement of conventional insurance as they wanted
to avoid interest in all respects. In addition to that, there was a need for an alternative to
life insurance, as in the case of housing finance by an increasing number of IFIs and for
the benefit of individuals. IFIs also needed to offer savings and protection-related Takaful
products to their customers. As such, the development of the Takaful industry was necessary
to complete the cycle of Islamic finance.
16.3 THE SHAR ¯I´AH BASIS OF TAKAFUL
The approximate Shar ¯ı´ah equivalent word for insurance in Arabic is “Ta’mein”, which
means to reassure, safeguard and guarantee through indemnity to losses. It also denotes
fidelity, loyalty, confidence and trust and refers more to guarantee than to cooperative sharing
of losses among a group. This concept remained under discussion of the scholars for about
a century. But the concept which finally gained Shar ¯ı´ah scholars’ acceptance on a large
scale is that of Takaful, which requires that the nature of the main insurance contract should
be converted to a contributory arrangement in which the losses to members may be covered
from the Takaful pool on the basis of mutual help and sacrifice.
Shaikh Abu Zahra, an eminent jurist of the 20th century, has deliberated upon the subject
in detail and concluded that a cooperative and social insurance scheme is, in principle,
legitimate, and that noncooperative insurance is unacceptable because it contains the traits
of gambling, temptation and usury that invalidate the contract. 4 The Islamic Fiqh Council
of the OIC approved the Takaful system based on mutual cooperation as an alternative to
conventional insurance in 1985.
Takaful is not a new concept for Islamic commercial law. Islam accepts the right of human
beings to protect their religion (belief), life, dignity and honour, property and talent. Some
similar practices were in vogue in early Islamic Arab Society, like ‘ ¯Aqilah (kinsmen; further
explained below), Qas ¯amah (an oath that was taken from the kinsmen of the murdered; in
one such case the holy Prophet paid blood money of one hundred camels of Sadaqah 5) and
Maw¯al¯at (a contract in which one party agreed to bequeath his property to the other on the
understanding that the benefactor would pay any blood money that may eventually be due
by the former) 6.
4 Khorshid, 2004, pp. 58, 59.
5 Muslim, 1981, Book 16, Kitab al Qasamah.
6 Khorshid, 2004, p. 24.


----- p.421 (pdf 449) -----


Takaful: An Alternative to Conventional Insurance 421
Contemporary jurists acknowledge that the principle of shared responsibility in the system
of “ ‘ ¯Aqilah” (kinsmen or people in a relationship) laid the foundation for Takaful. It was
practised in the ancient Arab tribes and the holy Prophet (pbuh) approved it. In the case
of any natural calamity, everybody used to contribute something until the disaster was
relieved. Similarly, the idea of ‘ ¯Aqilah in respect of blood money was based on the concept
of Takaful, wherein payments by the whole tribe distributed the burden of the family in
trouble. Islam accepted this principle of reciprocal compensation and joint responsibility. 7
In addition, such an institution of mutual help was established in the early second century
of the Islamic era when the Arabs expanding trade into Asia mutually agreed to contribute
to a fund to help anyone in the group that incurred mishaps or robberies during the sea
voyages.
On the basis of the above principles, the Takaful system as an alternative to conventional
insurance embodies the elements of shared responsibility, common benefit and mutual
solidarity. Every policyholder pays his subscription in order to assist those among them
who need assistance. The theory of Islamic finance does not accept Gharar or excessive
uncertainty in respect of rights and liabilities of the parties to a commercial contract. Hence,
the concept of Tabarru‘ (donation) has been incorporated in the arrangement as the main
ingredient of the contract. A participant of a Takaful policy agrees to relinquish, as Tabarru‘,
the whole or a certain proportion of his Takaful contributions that he undertakes to pay, thus
enabling him to fulfil his obligation of mutual help should any of his fellow participants
suffer a defined loss.
Another concept and institution which provides support to the idea of mutual help is that
of Waqf (endowment). Waqf in Islamic Shar ¯ı´ah refers to the retention of a property for the
benefit of a charitable or humanitarian objective, or for a specified group of people such
as members of the donor’s family. There are three kinds of Waqf in Islamic jurisprudence:
religious Waqf, philanthropic Waqf and family Waqf. Waqf becomes a separate entity which
has the ability to accept or transfer ownership. The ownership of the Waqf property is
transferred from the person creating the Waqf forever. Waqf property cannot be sold; only the
usufruct is assigned to the beneficiaries. According to the Waqf principles, a member (donor)
can also benefit from the Waqf. The beneficiaries of the Waqf in Takaful arrangements are
the creator of the Waqf and the group whose members contribute for the purpose of mutual
help and covering the losses to any of them.
Keeping the above in mind, the jurists have developed, over the last two or three decades, a
system of cooperative risk-sharing in such a way that on the one hand, the basic prohibitions
of Shar¯ı´ah are taken care of and, on the other hand, the requirements of the socio-economic
and financial framework are fulfilled. The losses of the unfortunate few are shared by the
contributions of the fortunate many that are exposed to the same risk on a cooperative
risk-sharing basis. The funds are used by the manager/trustee for payment of claims and for
business in any Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant manner. The underwriting surplus or deficit belongs to
the group members. The manager of the pool gets a return in the form of a fee and/or share
from the profit made from the investments of the funds in Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant avenues (this
is the “investment profit” – different from the UWS/UWL as discussed above).
7 Muslehuddin, 1982, p. 62; Nyazi, 1988, p. 339.


----- p.422 (pdf 450) -----


422 Understanding Islamic Finance
16.3.1 Main Objective of the Takaful System
The above discussion reveals that the main objective of the Takaful system from the poli-
cyholders’ point of view is mutual help and not earning profit or any windfall gains, as in
the case of conventional insurance. In all forms of Takaful, like family Takaful (alternative
to life insurance) or general Takaful, the participants agree to help one another out of their
contributions at the time when any of them faces any catastrophe or incurs any defined
loss. As a business venture, however, the operators can get fees and/or share the profits
against their services and the policyholders/partners can share the realized profit, if any,
after making up the losses incurred by the group members.
Having a family Takaful or Islamic life policy is not against virtue or piety. It does not
mean that one has insured one’s life; it is one of the means of providing a safeguard for
offspring and is thus in line with the saying of the holy Prophet (pbuh): “It is better for you
to leave your offspring wealthy than to leave them poor, asking others for help”. The holy
Prophet (pbuh) also encouraged the providing of security for widows, orphans and the poor,
as he highlighted in one of his sayings: “The one who looks after and works for a widow
and for a poor person (dependent), is like a warrior fighting for the cause of Allah (SWT),
or like a person who fasts during the day and prays throughout the night”.
Mutual help in the case of any catastrophe is also acclaimed in the Shar ¯ı´ah. There was
a concept of mutual protection practised in the Islamic era by establishing common pools
amongst Muslim traders to jointly compensate the loss to any group member due to robberies
or misfortune during their trade journeys. As such, the concept of Tabarru‘ and virtue with
other fellow beings is the main feature of Takaful business and any Takaful-based policy.
However, there is no Shar ¯ı´ah issue in viewing Takaful as a business when conducted with
Shar¯ı´ah compliance, transparency and fairness to all stakeholders.
16.4 HOW THE TAKAFUL SYSTEM WORKS
A Takaful company serves as a trustee or a manager on the basis of Wakalah or Mudarabah
to operate the business. The operator and the partners who take any policy contribute to
the Takaful fund. Claims are paid from the Takaful fund and the underwriting surplus or
deficit is shared by the participants. In life policies, a part of the contribution is also kept
as an investment fund. The operator uses the funds in the business on the basis of Wakalah
or Mudarabah. The underwriting surplus or deficit belongs to the policyholders/partners,
while distribution of profit arising from the business depends upon the basis of Wakalah or
Mudarabah.
The modus operandi of Takaful can be divided mainly into two types: family Takaful or
life policies and general Takaful. The contribution paid by the life policyholders is divided
into a “protection part” (for the Takaful fund/payment of claims) and a saving/investment
part if the company is working as Mudarib; if the company is working on a Wakalah basis,
contributions are divided into three parts, i.e. a part as a management fee, a protection part
and the investment part. The protection part works on a donation principle, according to
which individual rights are given up in favour of the Waqf. In the investment/savings part,
individual rights remain intact under the Mudarabah principle and the contributions, along
with the profit (net of expenses), are paid to the policyholders at the end of the policy term
or before, if required by them. In the case of general Takaful, the whole contribution is
considered a donation for protection and the participants relinquish their ownership right


----- p.423 (pdf 451) -----


Takaful: An Alternative to Conventional Insurance 423
in favour of the Takaful fund, and the UWS/UWL belongs to the participants. There is a
provision of Qard al Hasan by the company to the fund if claims at any time exceed the
amount available in it and the reserves are insufficient to meet the shortfall.
On the same bases of Tabarru‘, Waqf and Mudarabah, Takaful companies can arrange
re-Takaful, for which they pay an agreed-upon contribution from the Takaful fund to a
re-Takaful operator, which, in return, helps the Takaful companies in case of losses.
Here, a question arises about the treatment of Tabarru‘ or donation: some people consider
it synonymous with Sadaqah, or charity, that, once given, can neither be taken back nor
can any benefit be derived from it. 8 This, however, is not the case; every donation is not
necessarily Sadaqah. The operators who are working on the Mudarabah model are of the
view that the Takaful fund becomes a separate legal entity and the protection part of the
contribution of the policyholders is considered its part in case of any claims; it is conditional
on being used to pay the claims and there is an element of surplus, which may be given
back to the participants. Proportionate ownership of the contribution remains that of the
participants to the extent that the funds are not used for payment of the claims.
Even if the amount is considered Tabarru‘ from the very beginning, donations to Waqf are
used for the beneficiaries in favour of whom the Waqf has been created. Like Sadaqah, here
also, the person who contributes to the Waqf relinquishes his right of individual ownership;
but in contrast to Sadaqah, he can benefit from the fund as one of the beneficiaries. This
is why the model involving the concept of Waqf, as introduced in the Takaful business in
recent years, is considered preferable to the models that operate without Waqf. The whole
contribution by the policyholders or a part of it is considered a donation to the Waqf fund.
Policyholders have no claim on the donation part that is used for payment of claims. The
operator invests the funds in the business and shares the profits with the Waqf fund and the
policyholders get any share in the profit as beneficiaries of the fund.
In the early years when Takaful developed as a system, no distinction was made by the
Takaful operators between the underwriting surplus and the “investment profit”. Even now,
in many cases, sharing of profit or surplus that may emerge from the overall operations of
Takaful is made only after the obligation of assisting fellow participants has been fulfilled.
But in the continuing process of research and discussion, the scholars felt that the whole
UWS/UWL should belong to the participants/policyholders and the Takaful operator should
get a Takaful fee and/or a share in the “investment profit”.
16.4.1 Models of Takaful
Any form of insurance business acceptable to Islam must contain the virtues of cooperation,
solidarity and Tabarru‘. Shar ¯ı´ah scholars are also unanimous that there can be a commercial
basis conforming to the basic characteristics of Islamic business principles. Towards this
end, the scholars have suggested from time to time various models, like that of Wakalah,
Mudarabah, Waqf (a kind of endowment) or Wakalah with Waqf. According to the latest
research by over forty Shar ¯ı´ah scholars conducted under the guidance of Shaikh Muhammad
Taqi Usmani, a renowned contemporary jurist and member of the Shar ¯ı´ah councils of the
OIC/IDB and the AAOIFI, a Waqf model or a combination of Wakalah and Waqf is the best
basis for evolving a practical Takaful system in line with the Shar ¯ı´ah principles. Even prior
8 Billah, 2002.


----- p.424 (pdf 452) -----


424 Understanding Islamic Finance
to that, some jurists advocated the use of a Waqf mechanism to develop a Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant
insurance system. 9
In a pure Wakalah model, generally practised in the Middle East, the Takaful operator
acts as a Wakil for the participants and gets a fee in the form of an agreed percentage, say
30 % of the participants’ donations, and the whole UWS/UWL and the investment profit/loss
belongs to the policyholders or the participants. The Wakalah fee is to cover all management
expenses of business. The fee rate is fixed annually in advance in consultation with the
Shar¯ı´ah committee of the company. In order to give incentive, a part of the UWS is also
given to the operator, depending upon the level of performance. However, the loss (UWL),
if any, has to be borne only by the participants. The operator simply provides Qard al Hasan.
For this reason, the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars have expressed some reservation on this model, due
to it not being equitable.
Under a pure Mudarabah model, practised mainly in the Asia – Pacific region, the participants
and the operator enter into a Mudarabah contract for cooperative sharing of losses of the members
and sharing the profits, if any. The profit, which is taken to mean return on investments plus any
underwriting surplus (as in the case of conventional insurance), is distributed according to the
mutually agreed ratio, such as 50:50, 60:40, etc. between the participants and the company. The
Shar¯ı´ah committee of the Takaful company approves the sharing ratio for each year in advance.
Most of the expenses are charged to the shareholders. An issue in this model is that the amount
donated as Tabarru‘ cannot simultaneously become capital for the Mudarabah relationship.
Moreover, the Takaful operator gets the UWS, but does not bear the UWL. Therefore, Shar¯ı´ah
scholars have raised serious objections to this model.
In some cases, a model involving the combination of Mudarabah and Wakalah has been
adopted. Under the combined model, the sharing of profit between participants and operators
is an entitlement embedded in the contract, i.e. UWS and the investment profit both are
shared. There is, however, a structural issue in the way such profit/surplus is determined. The
issue is that, under Mudarabah, the operator, as the Mudarib, cannot charge its management
expenses from the Takaful fund separate from its share as Mudarib, whereas under Wakalah,
the operator, being the agent of the participants, can take its management fees from the fund
as per pre-agreed terms. Further, the operator does not bear the UWL. Therefore, it also
smacks of trouble from the Shar ¯ı´ah angle.
In the Waqf model introduced in recent years, the shareholders create a Waqf fund (Takaful
fund) through an initial donation to extend help to those who want cover against catastrophes
or financial losses. More than one Takaful fund can be formed for different classes of service.
Contributions of the participants, appropriate to the risk of the participants/assets, are divided
into two parts: one as donation to the Takaful fund and the other for investment on the
basis of Mudarabah. The donation part always remains with the Waqf. Operational costs
like re-Takaful, claims, etc. are met from the fund. The underwriting surplus or loss belongs
to the fund, which can be distributed to the beneficiaries of the Waqf, kept as a reserve
or reinvested to the benefit of the Waqf. There is no obligation to distribute the surplus.
Rules for management fees, distribution of profit, creation of reserves, the procedure, extent
or limit of compensation to the policyholders are decided beforehand. In the case of need,
shareholders give Qard al Hasan to the fund. For investment purposes, a Mudarabah contract
takes place between the Takaful fund and the company working as Mudarib. The investment
9 For details, see Khorshid, 2004, pp. 20–22.


----- p.425 (pdf 453) -----


Takaful: An Alternative to Conventional Insurance 425
part is invested by the company on a Mudarabah basis and is redeemed to the policyholder
on a NAV basis at maturity of the policy. The investment profit is shared between the
company and the fund. As per the contents of the policies, the company distributes the profit
among the beneficiaries.
Box 16.1: Flowchart of the Wakalah with Waqf Model of Takaful
Profit / loss
Attributable to
Shareholders
Investment
by Fund 
Profits  from
Investment
DONATION
PAID by
Participant 
WAQF
FUND
75%
TO
70%
WAQF
FUND
Operational 
Cost of
Takaful/
Retakaful
Share of
 surplus for
The participant
100%
Surplus
COMPANY
PARTICIPANT
60%
Share of Profit
for the Company
40%
Management
Expenses of
Company
WAQF
initial donation by
Shareholders to
create Waqf fund 
Takaful operator fees for
Administration expenses
25% to 30%
Profit sharing on
 Mudarabah bases
Prepared by Abdul Rahim Abdul Wahab of Sidat Hyder Murshid Associates, Karachi 
1. Shareholders create a Waqf for the purpose of Takaful; policyholders/participants
donate to the Waqf fund.
2. The company invests 70 % to 75 % of the Waqf fund on a Wakalah basis. 25–30 %
is the management fee for the company, from which it shall incur all management
expenses.
3. Claims/operational costs of Takaful and re-Takaful are charged to the Takaful fund
and the UWS or UWL belongs to the participants as a group.
4. A Mudarabah contract for investment purposes takes place between the fund and the
company. The profit-sharing ratio between the company and the fund in this case is
40 % and 60 % (it can be any ratio as per agreement).
Besides the usual technical reserves, the Waqf fund is allowed to create a contingency
reserve fund from the contributions and the profit earned on investment. This reserve is also


----- p.426 (pdf 454) -----


426 Understanding Islamic Finance
the property of the Waqf. The company’s sources of income are the Waqf management fee,
paid from the Waqf fund, a share in the investment profit as Mudarib or a service charge as
investment agent and the profit from shareholders’ money.
16.4.2 Issues in the Mudarabah Model
While the concept of Mudarabah is highly suitable as a basis for Islamic banking business,
particularly on the deposits side, it is not suitable for the insurance business. In a Mudarabah
model of Takaful, amounts paid by the participants and the investment incomes are used to
pay the claims, re-Takaful costs and other claims-related expenses from the general Takaful
fund. Normally, the shareholders meet all management and marketing-related expenses from
their share and any remaining amount is their net profit. However, in some cases, the
companies charge management expenses from the Takaful fund, which is against the rules of
Mudarabah. Some part of any underwriting surplus is also given to the operator, depending
upon his performance.
Shar¯ı´ah scholars have raised certain issues about the validity of the Mudarabah model
for Takaful on account of the following:
• In this arrangement the cooperative nature of the contract is undermined. The relationship
between the participants should base on Tabarru‘ and not Mudarabah; profit-sharing
cannot be applied here. A donation cannot be the Mudarabah capital at the same time.
• Sharing in any UWS makes the Takaful contract essentially the same as conven-
tional insurance, in which the shareholders become the risk-takers – they get the UWS
or bear the UWL; Mudarabah-based Takaful is rather worse, because the Takaful
operators/shareholders take only the UWS, but do not bear the UWL, if any. The point
is that a Takaful operator should not be a risk-taker, which he becomes in the case of the
Mudarabah model.
• In Mudarabah, invested capital has to be returned along with the profit, if any; and if
there is a loss, that has to be subtracted from the capital. In non-life Takaful, the paid
premiums are not returned.
• The requirement to provide Qard al Hasan (in case of a deficit) in a Mudarabah contract
is against the concept of Mudarabah by definition, which is a profit-sharing contract.
Further, a Mudarib cannot be a guarantor to the financier.
16.4.3 Issues in Wakalah and Wakalah–Mudarabah Models
• Wakalah combined with Shirkah arrangements (as in the case of most Takaful companies
in the Middle East that give a part of any UWS to shareholders) is subject to the same
objections as the Mudarabah model. The problem arises when the Takaful operator is
given a part of the UWS in addition to the operating fee as a performance incentive.
Sharing of surplus should be among the pool members of the fund.
• The risk premium should be separately defined and related to the risk; this should be the
same for similar risks, regardless of who the client is.
• For large clients, the company should reduce the operator’s fees and not the risk premium
rates.
• Expenses related to initial set-up should be borne by the shareholders.


----- p.427 (pdf 455) -----


Takaful: An Alternative to Conventional Insurance 427
16.5 TAKAFUL AND CONVENTIONAL INSURANCE COMPARED
Takaful and conventional insurance are different with respect to the objectives, structure, invest-
ment policies and returns. In conventional insurance, risk is transferred to one party – the com-
pany – and the prohibited factors of Riba, Gharar and gambling are involved. The policyholders
have to pay the premiums against unknown risks in the case of general insurance. In life insur-
ance, they get back the premiums along with interest in the case of survival and the insured
amount in the case of death before maturity of the policy. In Takaful, the participants or the group
members relinquish their ownership right of the amount of the donation and then the Waqf fund
bears the losses to any of them and the members share the UWS/UWL. The Takaful companies
manage the business and share the investment profit with the policyholders.
Although there still remains some uncertainty, it is within the group itself, all members
have jointly contributed to help those among them who incur any loss and share the remain-
der, if any. This is why the model of Takaful in which UWS/UWL fully belongs to the
participants is considered to be the best model as per the latest research. Uncertainty is
further minimized by recourse to reserves and access to Qard al Hasan to the Takaful fund
from the shareholders in case of need.
The risk premium in the conventional system is commercially driven, motivated by the
desire for maximum profit for the shareholders; while in Takaful, its adequacy is the main
consideration and the profit element is subject to the rules of equity, justice and ethics.
Losses in terms of underwriting or on investment, if any, are first absorbed by the
reserves, then from the interest-free loans from shareholders and then by a general increase in
pricing by the company. Hence, the Takaful system has a built-in mechanism to counter any
overpricing policies of the insurance companies, because whatever the amount of premium,
the surplus goes back to the participants in proportion to their contributions.
There are some basic differences between life policies in the two systems. A life insurance
policy under the conventional system revolves around the element of Riba, whereas the
Islamic model of life policy is based mainly on the principles of Waqf, Tabarru‘ and
Mudarabah. Under the conventional policies, payments to the agents are made from the
assureds’ paid premiums, whereas under the family Takaful policy, the agents work for the
company and thus they are paid by the company itself. With regard to the insurable interest,
under the conventional system, it is usually vested to the policyholder himself should he be
alive upon the expiry of the policy period. But, in the case of death of the assured within the
period, the insurable interest is to be vested to the nominee, who could be the husband/wife,
parents or children or any other person or entity. In contrast, under the Islamic model, the
insurable interest is to be vested to the assured himself or to his heirs, according to the
principles of inheritance and wills.
The idea of a conventional life policy is that if the assured dies at any time before the
maturity of the policy, the nominee is entitled to recover from the insurer the whole amount
agreed in the policy, while if the assured is alive upon the expiry of the policy period,
he is entitled to the whole amount agreed in the policy plus interest, dividends and bonus
subject to the company’s policy. On the contrary, in the Takaful system, if the assured
dies at any time before the maturity of policy, the company gives to the beneficiary the
amount projected in the policy, which includes his investment part along with profit, any
amount from the Takaful fund and the donation from the company at its discretion. In the
case where the policyholder is alive upon the expiry of the maturity period, the company
gives him the investment part along with profit, a pro rata share in the underwriting surplus


----- p.428 (pdf 456) -----


428 Understanding Islamic Finance
and a dividend/bonus according to the policy of the company. In the case of premature
termination, the partner is given the investment part along with profit and a pro rata share
in underwriting surplus (with reduced weightages depending upon the number of years). He
gets no assistance from the Takaful fund.
The distinction between conventional insurance and Takaful business is more visible with
respect to investment of funds. While insurance companies invest their funds, among others,
in interest-based avenues and without any regard to the concepts of Halal and Haram, Takaful
companies undertake only Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant business and the profits are distributed in
accordance with the pre-agreed formula/basis in the Takaful agreement.
16.6 STATUS AND POTENTIAL OF THE TAKAFUL INDUSTRY
The Takaful business has proved its viability in a period of only two decades. The first Takaful
company was established in 1979 – the Islamic Insurance Company of Sudan. Malaysia started
Takaful business in 1984. The system gathered momentum in Saudi Arabia and other Middle
Eastern countries. It has been growing at a rate of 10–20 % p.a., compared to the global average
growth of the insurance industry which is, 5 % p.a. A large number of Takaful companies exist
in the Middle East, Far East and even in some non-Islamic countries.
There are over 60 companies offering Takaful services (including windows – 5 %) in
24 countries around the world. These countries are: Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei, Egypt,
Ghana, Indonesia, Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Trinidad & Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United
Arab Emirates and Yemen. Takaful products are available to meet the needs of all sectors
of the economy, both at individual and corporate levels, to cater for short- and long-term
financial needs of various groups in society. Re-Takaful business has also been developed
in Malaysia, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia and UAE.
At global level, however, the Takaful system has not met with such a major degree of
success as has been witnessed in the case of Islamic banking. This is for two reasons:
1. The huge investment required to compete with the conventional insurance industry.
2. The changes required in regulatory requirements, as seen in the case of Malaysia, to
allow Takaful to compete on equal terms with the conventional industry.
Takaful business has a huge potential as there is increasing demand for a Shar ¯ı´ah-
compliant system, particularly with the development of the Islamic banking industry. There
has been low insurance density (premiums per capita) and low penetration (premiums as a
percentage of GDP) in Islamic countries, mainly because of the belief of the majority of
Muslims that insurance is un-Islamic, and that there is no alternative available to that system.
With the development of Islamic banking, there has been a significant increase in the Ijarah
and home mortgages which necessitate Takaful. Also, there is a need for Takaful in cases
of personal policies, like motor vehicles, health and family security.
The potential may be realized only if people are given education and awareness about the
features of the Takaful system, particularly about life Takaful. So far, only a small number
of companies are providing comprehensive family Takaful policies. In the Middle East, only
Bank Aljazira of Saudi Arabia is offering exclusive Takaful Ta‘awani (family Takaful) with
a full range of products like retirement, marriage, education and protection to the general
public and corporate clients. Other companies are engaged mainly in composite operations.


----- p.429 (pdf 457) -----


Takaful: An Alternative to Conventional Insurance 429
Takaful operators need to approach the large number of individuals and groups who have
not been taking out insurance cover in the past due to religious reasons.
Islamic banks may like to realize this potential and thus complete the cycle of Islamic
finance more quickly. In the markets or countries where a viable Takaful facility is not yet
available, they may jointly establish well-capitalized Takaful companies, as long as there
are no legal constraints. The main objective of these companies may be to provide Takaful
services to the Islamic banks, keeping in mind all Shar ¯ı´ah principles. They may also be
allowed to do other market business. This would create competition in the market and a
large number of general Takaful companies would be entering into the market to undertake
Shar¯ı´ah-compliant business with competitive pricing.
16.7 TAKAFUL CHALLENGES
The basic structure of a Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant insurance system has been generally accepted
by the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars to be essentially based on the principle of mutual help by group
members. The way ahead is to improve/reform and develop the existing operational struc-
tures in respect of the models and procedures. A number of conceptual issues need to
be addressed to ensure credibility and thus enhance the acceptability of the new indus-
try. Takaful operators should come forward to incorporate the institution of Waqf in the
Takaful arrangement, as it fully conforms to the requirements of the concept of Tabarru‘
and is free from Shar ¯ı´ah-related objections. Other problems that have to be addressed are
adequate capitalization, enabling the Takaful operators to work in competition with the
conventional companies, developing human resources, re-Takaful facilities and Shar ¯ı´ah-
compliant avenues for investment of funds, standardization/harmonization of the practices
and providing legal and regulatory frameworks for healthy operation of the industry.
The most important challenge that the Takaful industry is facing is creating awareness about
the concept itself. The majority of the Muslim population, who have been avoiding insurance
because of religious reasons, need to be assured that taking out cover against catastrophes in a
manner conforming to the principles of Shar¯ı´ah does not involve any prohibitions.
A Shar¯ı´ah board or an advisor and periodical Shar ¯ı´ah audit are required for every Takaful
company, not only for ensuring Shar ¯ı´ah compliance but also for enhancing the confidence
of the public with regard to Shar ¯ı´ah-related issues.
Takaful companies are mostly providing general business policies. The real potential lies
in family Takaful or Takaful Ta‘awani, to realize which, practitioners need to mobilize the
general public in Muslim societies. For this they also need a sound financial basis. Composite
business has the benefit of offering annual products, which are expense and surplus driven,
allowing an early and much-needed cash flow for successful Takaful business. Family
Takaful programmes, on the other hand, are cash-absorbing businesses in the early years of
establishment of the company. This problem can be solved only by enhancing the capital
base of the companies, which, of course, would benefit them in subsequent years.
Besides this, working in a competitive environment side by side with conventional
insurance companies is, in itself, a challenge. Takaful companies must offer competitive
products/services in terms of price, quality of coverage and delivery time. They will have to
work with a new mindset, avoiding malpractices and using the best professional expertise.
Policy holders also need to support Takaful companies and be proactive to ensure that the
companies are competitive and their operations are Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant in all respects. Re-
Takaful availability is a problem, as only a few companies are providing re-Takaful facilities


----- p.430 (pdf 458) -----


430 Understanding Islamic Finance
in Malaysia, UAE, Bahrain and Saudi Arabia, and that too on a Mudarabah basis, which is
objectionable, as discussed in the chapter.
Providing well-aware and competent manpower for the nascent Takaful industry is another
challenge. Only committed, trained and experienced personnel can enhance the acceptability
of the system among the public. While there are some facilities available for training in
Islamic banking, facilities in respect of Takaful are almost entirely lacking. In this respect,
the IRTI (IDB), the AAOIFI, training arms of the central banks and the Securities and
Exchange Commissions in countries where Islamic financial services are being developed
need to work proactively in collaboration with the Takaful companies.
Lastly, in view of the process of globalization of financial services, there must be stan-
dardization of the Takaful products. This will require efforts by the AAOIFI and IFSB
to prepare the Shar ¯ı´ah and performance standards respectively (as in the case of Islamic
banking) for standardization of services and structures feasible in the framework of mutual
help. Differences of opinion with regard to the Takaful models have to be resolved. This is
because reservations/differences, once expressed, would keep agitating the minds of stake-
holders and thus hinder the growth of the emerging industry. To avoid this and to harmonize
the practice, the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars and the practitioners should collaborate for convergence
on the basis of the Wakalah–Waqf model that is nearest to the principles of the Shar ¯ı´ah. The
regulators need to provide flexibility and ensure that the operators or practitioners perform
their functions, keeping in mind the generally accepted key benchmarks, like the CAMELS
tests and other performance criteria. 10
Appendix: Fat ¯awa (Juristic Opinions) on Different Aspects of Insurance
Source(s) Issue(s)
Fatwah by Shaikh al-Azhar Shaikh Jad al-Haq Ali Jad
al-Haq in 1995 (al-Iqtisadul Islami, July 1995)
Against life insurance
Fatwah issued in a judicial conference held in Makkah
in Shaban 1398 AH
Against the validity of insurance
The unanimous decisions of the Muslim scholars in a
seminar held in Morocco on 6th May, 1972
Against life insurance
Verdict of the Supreme Court of Egypt on 27th
December, 1926
Against life insurance
Fatwah issued by the National Religious Council
(Malaysia) in 1972
Against the validity of conventional
insurance
Two Fat ¯awa issued by Shaikh Mohammad Abduh (the
ex-Grand Mufti of Egypt) in 1900–1901
In favour of the validity of insurance
A unanimous fatwah issued by the ulama in the Muslim
League Conference, held in Cairo in 1965
Against life insurance
Fat¯awa issued by the Higher Council of Saudi Ulama
in 1397 AH
In favour of insurance under an Islamic
model
Fat¯awa issued by the Fiqh Council of Muslim World
League in 1398 AH
In favour of insurance under an Islamic
model
Fat¯awa issued by Shaikh Mohd Baqit (the ex-Mufti of
Egypt) in 1906
In favour of insurance
10 The author is grateful to M/s Hassan Kaleem, Shar ¯ı´ah Advisor, Al Baraka Islamic Bank, Pakistan and Abdul Rahim Abdul
Wahab of Sidat Hyder Murshid Associates, Karachi for their conceptual and technical help in writing this chapter.


----- p.431 (pdf 459) -----


Takaful: An Alternative to Conventional Insurance 431
Fat¯awa issued by the Fiqh Council of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference in 1405 AH
In favour of insurance under an Islamic
model
Unanimous decision by the ulama in the First
International Conference for the Islamic Economy
held in Makah in 1396 AH
In favour of insurance under an Islamic
model
Fatwah issued by the State of Trengganu in 1974 Against the validity of conventional
insurance
Fatwah issued by the State of Selangor in 1970 Against the validity of conventional
insurance
Fatwah issued by the State of Negri Sembilan in 1972 Against the validity of conventional
insurance
Fatwah issued by the State of Kelantan in 1975 Against the validity of conventional
insurance
Fatwah issued by the State of Perak in 1974 Against the validity of conventional
insurance
Source: http://islamic-finance.net/Islamic-insurance/fatawa.html.


----- p.432 (pdf 460) -----




