
----- p.433 (pdf 461) -----


17
An Appraisal of Common Criticism of
Islamic Banking and Finance
17.1 INTRODUCTION
Islamic banking and finance has seen impressive growth in the world over the last three
decades. It has come a long way towards providing most of the financial services that only
interest-based banking and non-bank financial institutions had been providing. But its share
in the financial sector as a whole at national and global levels is very low, even in Muslim
majority countries. Almost all Muslims believe that any involvement in Riba – taking, giving,
witnessing and even documenting Riba-based transactions – is a great sin that is tantamount
to waging war with Allah (SWT) and his Prophet (pbuh). So why, despite the lapse of over
three decades since the start of the Islamic finance movement in the modern age, is the
share of Islamic banking in the financial system 1.5 % in Indonesia, 2.2 % in Pakistan, 12 %
in Malaysia and 24 % in Bahrain? Bahrain is the hub of Islamic banking, where a lot of
work has been done in finalizing the Shar ¯ı´ah standards for Islamic modes, innovation in
Shar¯ı´ah-compliant products, providing a suitable regulatory framework for Islamic banks
and the establishment of an Islamic capital market. If so much preparatory work has been
accomplished, why has the whole system not been transformed on a Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant
basis and why is a vast majority of the Muslim population still involved in waging war with
Allah and His holy Prophet?
The major factors behind this phenomenon, among others, are a number of myths and a
lot of confusion about the Islamic theory of finance among the public and the intelligentsia
and unattended common criticism of the concepts and practice of Islamic banking. The
misconceptions about Islamic banking and criticisms about its theory and practice have been
discussed directly or indirectly in various places in the book. The need for removing the
myths and analysing the criticism to impart convincing clarity and confidence to readers and
to create commitment among the practitioners for development of the emerging financial
discipline in its true perspective cannot be overemphasized. Hence, a full-fledged chapter is
devoted to this cause. In this chapter we shall analyse the myths and the criticism generally
made on Islamic banking on conceptual and practical grounds. In places, we shall refer to
the relevant parts of the book where the issue has already been discussed in detail.
17.2 THE COMMON MYTHS AND OBJECTIONS
As indicated above, the stakeholders of Islamic finance have a number of questions and
objections about the emerging system; there also exists a significant amount of confusion.
Some common objections and misconceptions will be discussed here; however, answering


----- p.434 (pdf 462) -----


434 Understanding Islamic Finance
all frequently asked questions is not the objective. 1 Criticisms related to the philosophy and
concepts of Islamic banking and finance are briefly listed below.
1. The connotation of the word Riba is not expressly given in the original sources of the
Shar¯ı´ah, i.e. the Holy Qur´ ¯an and the Sunnah. There are two extremes: while many
people consider that commercial interest as in vogue is not Riba, which is prohibited,
many others believe that a “bank” cannot be Islamic and that any return over savings and
financial investments is prohibited as Riba. Other major objections related to the concept
of Riba are:
— Money is like other commodities used, bought or sold; if someone borrows money,
he should pay for it and the interest is the payment for its use; a lessor can charge
rent from the lessee for use of the asset or for benefiting from its usufruct. A lender
of money or a debtor should also be allowed to charge rent from the borrower or the
debtor.
— Riba that is prohibited in the Qur´ ¯an was a specific kind of increase over the principal.
Riba at the maximum would be where any charge is added on any old unpaid debt
or loan and if some charge is added to the loan at the very beginning, it would not
be Riba.
— There was no commercial interest in Arabia at the time of the revelation of the Holy
Qur´¯an. As such, commercial interest as is found in the present age is not prohibited.
Only a high rate of interest (termed “usury”) is prohibited and any normal charge on
loans or debts does not come under the purview of prohibition.
— Some people legalize interest on account of inflation and decrease in purchasing
power of the lent money. They say that the borrower must indemnify the lender in
case of depreciation of the loan amount due to inflation. They criticize the theory
of Islamic finance as it does not accept indexation of financial liabilities with gold,
baskets of goods or any stable currency.
— It is also argued that debtors in the present age are not poor people; therefore, charging
interest from them is not unjust.
2. “Interest” is based on the concepts of time value of money or opportunity cost; rejecting
interest should imply rejecting time value of money. Hence, Islamic banks should neither
give any return on deposits nor charge any rate from the users of funds; they should
operate only on the basis of Musharakah/Mudarabah or give return-free loans. If they
are involved in trading activities, the credit price they may charge should be equal to the
cash-n-carry price of the relevant commodity in the market. Otherwise, Islamic banks
would be involved in Riba.
3. If Islamic banking means avoiding predetermined/fixed returns as found in the form of
conventional interest, it should be based on the two-tier Mudarabah/Musharakah – mobi-
lizing and advancing funds on the basis of profit/loss sharing. Hence, debt should not be
part of Islamic banking and finance. Banks should either give return-free loans for provid-
ing assistance to the needy and the poor or operate on the basis of Musharakah/Mudarabah
to provide risk-based capital for the development of business, industry and economies.
1 For answers to FAQs, readers may like to see Jarhi and Munawar, 2001.


----- p.435 (pdf 463) -----


An Appraisal of Common Criticism 435
4. Banks are intermediaries by nature and deal in documents only; they should not involve
themselves in trading or other direct business; otherwise they will be taking unnecessary
risk exposure and leaving themselves open to possible loss to the investors and the
financial system.
5. There are differences of opinion in respect to a number of concepts, modes and products
of Islamic finance, due to which a standardized system cannot be developed. Many
products developed in the Far East and other parts of the world are almost identical to
interest-based products. Those products provide the same or similar return to the investors
without any possible impact on socio-economic growth, as claimed by the pioneers of
Islamic finance. Examples of this are sale of debt and debt instruments, giving returns
to the investors in the form of gifts and last but not least, Tawarruq, for which Islamic
banks simply engage one or two brokers to sign a few documents to get or place liquidity
at fixed rates of return.
With regard to the practice of Islamic banking, the generally made criticism pertains to
the following:
1. There is divergence between the theory of Islamic finance and its practices. The pioneers
of the theory prescribed the use of Musharakah and Mudarabah (PLS modes); but
practically, the share of PLS modes is negligible and the mainstream business is based
on debt-creating modes to earn fixed returns as in the case of the interest-based system.
2. Islamic financial institutions (IFIs) operate on the basis of predetermined and fixed
rates and earn fixed returns. So-called Islamic Sukuk also carry fixed returns, just like
conventional fixed-income securities. How, then, are they Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant?
3. Islamic banks price their products on the basis of interest-related benchmarks like
LIBOR; charge predetermined rates to the clients on the assets side and give bench-
marked rates to depositors, just as conventional banks give to their investors in a given
jurisdiction.
4. There is no factual difference between the operations of conventional and Islamic banks.
Islamic banks are performing as intermediaries working on the same grounds on which
the conventional institutions are working.
5. The net result of conventional and Islamic bank financing is the same. In leasing, for
example, Islamic banks add all costs, including insurance, transportation, registration of
the leased assets, etc., to determine the rental related to the interest-based benchmark;
and at the end, they transfer the leased asset to the client, as in the case of conventional
lease finance. In mortgage financing also, they charge the profit/rent on the basis of an
IRR/benchmark. Even in the case of Shirkah-based modes, their main concern is to get
a market-based rate of return on their investment.
6. IFIs do not actually get involved in trading activities. They have no inventories of the
goods to be sold, make the clients their agents for purchasing the goods requisitioned
by them and many a time engage in buy-back and Tawarruq (monetization or cash
procurement through tailored trade contracts) activities.
7. Islamic banks normally are working in the same regulatory frameworks in which the
conventional banks are working. “Islamic windows” or stand-alone Islamic banking
branches (IBBs), allocate interest income as the seed or base capital. By offering such
“Windows” they are only befooling the public, who avoided interest on the basis of
belief, for mobilizing petrodollars in the Middle East and the excess wealth in the Muslim
majority and minority countries. How can a Riba-based institution ensure Shar ¯ı´ah


----- p.436 (pdf 464) -----


436 Understanding Islamic Finance
compliance while working in a Riba-ridden environment? It gives rise to doubts about
their Islamicity/credibility.
8. Islamic banks take collateral/security like their counterparts in conventional finance.
They should facilitate people who are not in a position to offer any security without
any requirement of collateral, while practically they demand security, even in the case
of Musharakah/Mudarabah.
9. For the legality of fixed returns, Islamic banks prepare a number of documents and
enter into different agreements in respect of one overall transaction. They make the
clients their agents for various activities without payment of any agency fee, enter into
“promise” in almost all modes of financing and combine a number of contracts against
the Shar¯ı´ah injunction that prohibits two contracts in one contract.
10. If money has always to be linked to real assets and real sector business, as claimed in
Islamic finance theory, how can the needs for cash for paying salaries to employees,
utility bills, etc. be fulfilled?
11. The Holy Qur´ ¯an advises granting more time to a debtor who is in difficulty, or even
forgiving/writing-off the whole debt; but Islamic banks charge penalties from defaulting
clients.
In the following paragraphs, we critically examine the above myths and criticisms. In
some cases, we briefly touch on the area by referring to different chapters of the book.
17.3 APPRAISAL OF CONCEPTUAL CRITICISM
17.3.1 The Connotation of the Word Riba
The meaning and connotation of Riba has already been discussed in detail in Chapter 3
(Section 3.2.1) and Chapter 7 (Section 7.3). Here, we shall briefly analyse the related
objections and try to remove the common myths. First, saying that the Qur´ ¯an and the
Sunnah have not explained the connotation of Riba is not correct. Although the Qur´ ¯an has
not given any legal definition of Riba, as in the case of other terms used by the Holy Book,
it has quite sufficiently elaborated its connotation. In the related verses of Surah Al Baqarah
(2: 274–281), it differentiates between business and charity on the one hand, and trading
and usurious activities on the other hand, permitting the trade and its profit and prohibiting
Riba. It ordains that whatever is sought over and above the principal of a loan or a debt is
Riba and therefore prohibited. This explicitly or implicitly describes the liabilities and rights
of human beings and ordains the avoidance of exploitation of each other’s rights. Similarly,
the holy Prophet (pbuh) has categorically prohibited any increase sought over and above the
principal of a loan or a debt, due to its being Riba.
While Islam encouraged Qard al Hasan, or loaning free of any charge, it prohibited the
business of exchanging monetary units and other goods of the same ‘Illah (effective cause
of prohibition), except for hand to hand (in case of heterogeneous goods) and hand to hand
and equal for equal (in case of homogeneous items of exchange). This is to ensure that
when one party to exchange is giving resources/purchasing power to the other along with
the opportunity to use, the other party should also give in exchange the stipulated resources
forthwith so that the other may also use the same at his discretion. If monetary units are
not exchanged simultaneously, a person can take benefit by use of a money/currency which
he has received while he has not given its counter value from which the other party could
derive benefit.


----- p.437 (pdf 465) -----


An Appraisal of Common Criticism 437
Thus, it is established from the texts of the Shar ¯ı´ah that modern commercial interest
comes under the purview of Riba and no form of loans/debts based on interest is exempt
from this prohibition. No differentiation can be made between a low and a high rate of
interest expressed on a fixed or floating percentage of the principal or with regard to the
purpose of the loan, i.e. for consumption or production. “Rate” is a relative term and, based
on the principle given by the Holy Qur´ ¯an, any addition over the amount of debt per se is
prohibited, irrespective of the rate. We have explained in detail in Chapter 3 that commercial
interest was a major feature of business at the time the Holy Qur´ ¯an was revealed, and
financing on the basis of Riba was a profession of the rich at that time. The common feature
of all Riba-based transactions was that an increased amount was charged on the principal
amount of debts. At times the debt was created through a transaction of sale and sometimes
it was created through a loan. Similarly, the increased amount was, at times, charged on a
monthly/yearly basis, while the principal was to be paid at a stipulated date, and sometimes
it was charged along with the principal. All these forms used to be called Riba. Hence,
all loans that embody any benefit over and above the principal as a precondition are void,
irrespective of the fact that the condition embodies a rate, low or high, or any gain in quantity
or quality.
17.3.2 Rent on Money Capital
Money is to facilitate socio-economic activities of human beings by serving as a medium
of exchange. Islamic Shar ¯ı´ah encourages the use of money (in whatever form it may be)
to avoid exploitation of one another. In a number of well-known Ah ¯adith, the holy Prophet
(pbuh) advised not to exchange low-quality commodities of a genus with better-quality
commodities of the same genus (except in equal amounts) and ordained that one should
first sell the low-quality goods and then purchase, with the money so received, the superior
quality goods, and vice versa. The rationale behind this is to save both parties from possible
losses or exploitation of one party by the other.
Financial transactions, in order to be permissible and for the purpose of earning profit,
should be associated with real assets or instruments representing real assets. Money cannot
be awarded a fixed charge for its use. It is pertinent to observe in this regard that in Islamic
economics, human efforts and economic activities have been given more strategic position in
the distribution of produce and profits than capital in the form of money. Linking money to
productive purposes brings into action labour and other resources bestowed by Allah (SWT)
to initiate a process from which goods and services are produced and the benefits pass on to
society. Unlike the conventional system, where money is considered a commodity that may
be sold/bought and rented against profit, or rent that one party has to pay irrespective of the
use or role of lent money in the hands of the borrower, the Islamic system links capital in
the form of cash to the actual business activities and their results.
Capital as a factor of production in Islamic finance constitutes those things which can be
used up in the production process in such a way that they are wholly consumed or used, such
as gold, silver in the past and/or paper currency in the present age. Such goods cannot be
leased because their corpus is consumed with their use, as in the case of fuel or edible goods,
and their provider is not in a position to bear the risk related to the ownership. Monetary
units, also including paper money, serving as capital are entitled to profit, provided they also
accept the risk of loss. In other words, monetary units cannot be leased, because the risk of
loss is attributable to the money capital itself and its form changes altogether. Fixed assets


----- p.438 (pdf 466) -----


438 Understanding Islamic Finance
like buildings and machinery have claims on rent because the lessor retains their ownership
and bears the related risks. Therefore, one cannot derive any benefit from money unless one
gives it up in exchange for commodities or services using the structure of any of the valid
contracts of sale or lease.
Real sector business transactions take any of the following three forms: sale/purchase
that may be either on cash or credit, loaning or leasing. When executed, these transactions
have different implications in respect of transfer of ownership, risk and liability. Earning of
profit depending upon the outcome of the business is permissible. Whether it is a real sector
business or a financial activity, risk always remains with the ownership. A person who gives
a loan has the right to get it back; he bears no risk irrespective of whether the borrower
earned any profit or incurred loss or even used the borrowed money in consumption. Hence,
he cannot claim any return on his loaned capital. If a person who is providing the funds
wants any profit over his money, he will have to agree to bear the loss, if any. In this case,
the realized profit would be distributed as per a pre-agreed ratio, while a loss would be
shared in proportion to the investment made by each financier; a fund user’s loss being his
unrewarded labour. Hence, there is no place for “interest”. That is to say, one is entitled to
profit only if one bears the risk of loss.
If a person purchases a commodity, gets its possession/risk, he can sell it with a margin
of profit on cash or credit. As soon as the (credit) sale is executed, his right is the receivable
thus created, while the asset risk is transferred to the buyer. If he transforms his money
capital into a fixed/nonconsumable asset, he has the right to lease it on rent provided he
bears the ownership-related risks and expenses. Keeping in mind this principle, it can be
said that one can earn profit on his investment or financing but that has to be related to
certain assets exposed to direct or indirect business risk. As a lender or a creditor bears no
risk and is entitled to repayment of the whole amount of the loan or the debt, he has no right
to claim any return or rent.
17.3.3 Inflation and Interest
Interest cannot be legalized on the basis of inflation, mainly because of the fact that loaning
in Islam is a noncommutative and virtuous activity. It should not be mixed with a business
that is conducted with the objective of earning profit. Profit can be earned if capital is linked
to any liability, risk or responsibility. Islamic finance does not have the provision of linking
any debt or receivable with any currency/commodity. The clear injunctions of the Holy
Qur´¯an and Sunnah reveal that if financial contribution takes the form of a loan or a debt,
it is to be paid back exactly in the same kind and quantity, irrespective of any change in
the value of the concerned currency or price of the commodity lent or borrowed at the time
of return of the loan. If one wants to avoid the risk of depreciation in value, one should
transform one’s money into a real asset, undertake any business, earn profit thereby and get
a rental or a share in the realized profit by taking liability of the loss. In the presence of the
Nass of the Holy Qur´ ¯an (verse 2: 279), the idea of linking loans/debts to the purchasing
power of money cannot be justified on the basis of Ijtihad, because Ijtihad is carried out
only where a clear directive by the Qur´ ¯an or Sunnah does not exist.
During an inflationary period, the intrinsic characteristics of money, i.e. its role as a
medium of exchange and as a unit of account, remain intact. Only the relative characteristic
changes, i.e. the future value of money in terms of its exchange value; but this has been
changing since the introduction of money, even in respect of full-bodied coins. The value of


----- p.439 (pdf 467) -----


An Appraisal of Common Criticism 439
silver dirhams depreciated in terms of gold dinars even during the early Caliphate. 2 But we
do not find any reference in the whole literature on Islamic jurisprudence to the concept of
indexation on account of fluctuation in the value of money. Prohibition of Riba essentially
requires that all like-for-like exchanges be executed on an equal basis in terms of the relevant
units of exchange. If this does not suit someone, he is free to avoid such an exchange and to
pursue an alternative permissible course of action, like sale, lease or any partnership-based
arrangement. For example, through credit sale, a need of the buyer may be fulfilled, while
concerns of the seller may be accommodated through the margin added in the deferred price.
But, here again, the price, once agreed, has to remain fixed.
Gold, silver and other monetary units like paper currencies are among the six commodities
whose exchange must be like for like, equal for equal and hand to hand. If someone borrows
100 dollars payable after one year, and this amount, after indexation, becomes 105 dollars,
it falls into the category of Riba. As elaborated in Chapter 7 (Section 7.17), renowned jurists
like Al-Kasani and Ibn Qudama have clearly expressed the view that the borrower should
pay the same coins or currency as he took, irrespective of any increase or decrease in its
value.
As per the Shar ¯ı´ah principle, a loan/receivable that seeks any increase involves Riba.
In the case of inflation, the value of a currency decreases across the board; it makes no
difference whether a person has lent it or is keeping it with himself in liquid form. If he lends
it by indexing with gold, for example, in order to avoid a decrease in its value, this implies
that he has drawn benefit from the loan, as the debtor would make good the deficiency to
the amount of lent money, while money kept in his own coffer would also lose its value.
Drawing this benefit from the loan violates the Shar ¯ı´ah. The crux of the matter is that a
loan is a nonremunerative contract; as such, it should remain noncommutative and not used
as a means for earning or getting compensation.
Even in conventional finance, indexation is not normally used to make up for a loss
occurring due to inflation. Conventional institutions make a provision for a floating rate in
the agreements, keeping in mind the future inflationary pressures. As such, any new rate is
applied on the remaining period, while it does not affect the liability already accrued. In
certain modes/products, Islamic banks are also allowed to stipulate a floating or variable
rate, as in the case of leasing, but this does not affect any debt liability once created. For
example, in leasing, Islamic banks can charge rental at a higher rate, if already provided in
the agreement, for any remaining period of the lease; but the rentals for a particular period,
once accrued, cannot be indexed.
We come to the conclusion, therefore, that if the financial contribution takes the form of
a loan or a debt, it is to be paid back exactly in the same kind and quantity, irrespective
of any change in the value of the currency in which it is denominated or the price of the
commodity lent or borrowed at the time of return of the loan.
17.3.4 Time Value of Money and Islamic Banking
Some people who believe in prohibition of interest criticize Islamic banking on charging
time value of money through pricing, while some others are of the view that avoiding
interest means negation of time value of money; therefore, they argue that either Islamic
2 See Maududi, 1982–1991, 1, pp. 382, 383 (4: 92).


----- p.440 (pdf 468) -----


440 Understanding Islamic Finance
banks who charge higher credit prices than the spot prices of the goods are not Islamic or
the present-day bank interest is not prohibited. Both views are based on misconception. We
have discussed this issue in detail in Chapter 4. It was explained that time value is approved
by the Shar ¯ı´ah in trading/exchange of real goods but not in Qard or Dayn, against which
one cannot derive any benefit. Pricing of goods and their usufruct is a major part of any
business transaction, and for the purpose of pricing, the place and the time of transaction are
crucial factors. A commodity might be cheaper in one part or market of a city than another
part or market of the same city. Similarly, a commodity might be cheaper at the peak of the
season than at its beginning. The Shar ¯i‘ah does recognize differences in value due to place
and time elements, and does not prohibit realizing the time value of money in a genuine
business transaction based on exchange (sale and leasing). What is prohibited is any claim
to the time value of money as a predetermined quantity calculable at a predetermined rate
not related to any real sector business.
There is almost a consensus among the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars that the credit price of a
commodity can genuinely be more than its cash price, provided one price is agreed at the
time of execution of the contract (discussed in detail in Chapter 6; Sections 6.5.3 and 6.8).
Similarly, it is quite natural that in forward contracts like Salam, the future delivery price
is less than the price at the time of delivery of goods. This is tantamount to the acceptance
of time value of money in the pricing of goods. What is prohibited is any addition to the
price once agreed because of any delay in its payment. This is so because the commodity,
once sold (on credit), generates debt and belongs to the purchaser on a permanent basis
and the seller has no right to re-price a commodity that he has sold and which no longer
belongs to him. The concept of time value of money in the context of Shar ¯ı´ah is also
established from the disapproval of Riba Al-Fadl, which involved gold and silver in addition
to some other commodities that perhaps were used as media of exchange. Exchange of
these commodities on a deferred basis is banned as a rule. Only hand-to-hand exchange is
allowed, on the condition that the quantity on both sides is the same. This implies that the
Shar¯ı´ah prohibits mutual exchange of gold, silver or monetary values except when it is
done simultaneously. This is so because a person can take benefit by a medium of exchange
which he has received while he has not given its counter value from which the other party
could take the benefit.
Valuation of a credit period for pricing the goods or their usufruct is different from the
conventional concepts of “opportunity cost” or the “time value”. As such, “mark-up” in
trade is permissible, provided the Shar ¯ı´ah rules relating to sale of goods are adhered to, but
interest is prohibited, as this is an increase over any loan or debt. Therefore, no time value
can be added to the principal of a loan or a debt after it is created or the liability of the
purchaser fixed.
Islamic economics has the genuine provision of converting money into assets, on the
basis of which one can measure its utility. While most of the jurists uphold the concept
and practice of a higher credit price than the cash market price of goods, none of them
allows generating rent on the principal amount of loans and debts. Hence, there is no
justification to assume a zero rate of time preference in an Islamic economy. Similarly, one
cannot add value to loans and debts on account of time. Economic agents can have positive
time preferences and there will be indicators available in the economy to approximate
the rates of their time preferences, generally determined by the forces of demand and
supply.


----- p.441 (pdf 469) -----


An Appraisal of Common Criticism 441
17.3.5 Charging Interest from Rich Debtors
The argument that, in the present age, the borrowers from financial institutions belong
mostly to the rich business community, and charging interest from them is not unjust, is
not convincing at all. This argument would be tenable only if all indebted businesses were
earning a profit significantly higher than the interest rate. But if some earn less than the
interest rate, some earn out of proportion while some others incur a loss, the claim loses
ground. This criticism rather strengthens the case against interest, because the relatively
richer class takes funds at much cheaper rates vis-à-vis their profits from the business. They
give a small part of their profit in the form of interest to the banks, which is treated as
an expense and ultimately charged to the consumers. If some of them incur a loss in the
business, they normally resort to different unethical practices to avoid the loss, causing harm
to society as a whole. Thus, the rich become richer, leaving the poor poorer. The solution to
the problem lies in making available a framework in which one may earn profit/return/income
only through exerting mental or physical labour, or taking responsibility and business risk.
Interest leads to exploitation of any of the parties, i.e. the debtor or the creditor, and hence
it is prohibited, irrespective of who is the exploiter in any particular transaction. Due to the
involvement of interest and gambling on a massive scale, the conventional financial system
has become a means for exploiting savers or depositors and the general public.
17.3.6 Different Shar ¯ı´ah Interpretations
Another criticism of Islamic finance is that its products are not standardized because a
number of its concepts are subject to different Shar ¯ı´ah interpretations. Islamic scholars
do not resort to Ijtihad and therefore, Islamic finance cannot become a solid basis for a
financial system to replace the present conventional system. However, as the Islamic banking
movement has already passed a significant milestone of having evolved a general consensus
on the philosophy and products for business, with large-scale acceptance of mainstream
theory and practice, slight differences in the concepts are no longer an issue of concern. As
regards standardization of the products, this will take time. For the time being, evolving the
products along with their process and procedures is the main challenge. Further, institutions
like the IDB, the AAOIFI and the IFSB are working on this line; this may increasingly lead
to standardization in the future.
Islamic Shar¯ı´ah has provided flexibility for Ijtihad to respond to changes and diversity in
day-to-day life. Remaining within the Shar ¯ı´ah boundaries, a great deal of Ijtihad is needed
to infer from the original sources the appropriate rules relating to transactions of business
and finance. In the recent past, the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars have very rightly used this source of
deriving principles to facilitate the growth of Islamic finance on a wider scale. But Ijtihad
has its own limitations. It is neither a source of anarchy nor a means of transforming the
Islamic Shar ¯ı´ah from Divine to man-made law. The concepts of custom, general good,
utility and necessity are also taken into consideration in the process of Ijtihad, based on
proper analogy, but these factors are relevant only when the basic principles given in the
Nass (clear texts of the Qur´ ¯an and Sunnah) are taken care of and the outcome conforms to
the objectives (Maqasid) of the Shar ¯ı´ah.
The development of ethical and belief-based disciplines depends on the acceptability of
their conceptual underpinnings and their implementation procedures. The mainstream theory
of Islamic finance has got this acceptance and the industry has to be developed on the basis
of the acceptable concepts. Some concepts that serve as the basis for application in some


----- p.442 (pdf 470) -----


442 Understanding Islamic Finance
areas have not obtained general acceptance, and many scholars, even those belonging to
such areas, have pointed out convincing arguments against these concepts. For example,
products that involve Bai‘ al Dayn (sale of debts/receivables) and Bai‘ al ‘Inah (buy-back
arrangements) are not genuine products for Islamic banking business, as they do not fit its
philosophy.
Islamic finance provides a firm basis for a sound and efficient financial system by dint
of supply of risk-related capital and a balanced return rate structure through prohibition of
interest and Gharar and undertaking only asset-based business activities according to a well-
defined set of rules for the related businesses. Keeping in mind the genuine need of IFIs and
the rules of Shar¯ı´ah, Shar¯ı´ah scholars have given a number of relaxations. Allowing the levy
of penalty on a percentage per annum basis on defaulters, albeit for charity; foreign currency
forward cover through unilateral promise to exchange two currencies simultaneously at a
pre-agreed rate; the practice of sale and lease-back, particularly in the case of the corporate
sector and sovereigns; a number of flexibilities in respect of Sukuk and securitization, like
the provision of third party guarantee for the possibility of making the Sukuk “fixed-income
securities” and permission for Tawarruq where actual trade takes place and the goods are
sold in the market or to any third party, are some major areas where Shar ¯ı´ah scholars
have provided a helping hand to the Islamic finance movement by way of Ijtihad. One
should not expect edicts in favour of every new product in the conventional market, as
this would dilute the sanctity of Islamic finance. Hence, we can conclude that major issues
relating to interpretation have been resolved and now the practitioners should proceed with
standardization on the basis of the settled principles, which provide solid and sufficient
grounds for conducting business.
17.3.7 Islamic Banks Using Debt-creating Modes
A number of authors on Islamic finance, both economists and financial experts, have been
saying that Musharakah and Mudarabah are the only modes to serve as an alternative
to interest in the Islamic framework. They contend that if IFIs have to avoid interest,
they should either operate on a return-free basis or conduct business only on the basis of
Mudarabah/Musharakah. This is, however, a myth and misconception. It is neither a Shar ¯ı´ah
requirement nor possible in actual life. Trading has been an overwhelming part of human
activities forever. The major economic activities of human beings, besides producing goods,
involve trading, leasing or rendering services for others. These activities can be conducted
in different structures like self-entrepreneurship, hiring others’ expertise and services on
payment and partnership. Any individual or institution can opt for any structure by observing
the related rules of business. The only requirement that the Shar ¯ı´ah makes is that in order
to get a return, one must make a value addition by way of labour, risk or responsibility.
If one chooses the business of trading, one must get a commodity, take its ownership and
risk and then sell it by adding profit. In leasing, one has to take ownership-related risks to
be entitled to get rental. In partnership-based business activities, the financier has to bear
the business loss, if any, for entitlement to profit in the joint venture. If Islamic banks
fulfil the relevant requirements, they can do business through any of the above structures.
This aspect requires discussion on two aspects: permissibility versus preference of some
modes over others and suitability/possibility of use of various modes, keeping in mind the
ground realities and the risk profile and requirements of the investors and the banks. This is
discussed below.


----- p.443 (pdf 471) -----


An Appraisal of Common Criticism 443
Preference versus Permissibility of Various Modes
Debt has been prevalent forever, and will remain an important part of individuals’ and
nations’ economies. The holy Prophet (pbuh) himself borrowed and incurred debt (through
credit purchase and borrowing), both for personal and the State’s requirements, as we have
discussed in Chapter 7. The only point to be taken care of is that a debt should not carry any
charge over its principal. Therefore, debt-creating modes like Murabaha, Salam and Ijarah
will remain as operating tools in the hands of Islamic financial institutions, and spot, credit
and/or forward trade will remain a major economic activity in the Islamic framework. The
issue is not of the permissibility of such modes, but of a preference for equity-based modes
over debt-creating modes.
However, some people mix the aspect of permissibility with preference or priority. Some
modes/products are considered borderline techniques, due mainly to fixity of profit rates for
the banks. But that fixity of profit margin per se is not any problem at all. All transactions
of Islamic banks should be based on exchange of commodities, goods, services or labour.
If there is exchange of commodities or services along with the application of the relevant
Shar¯ı´ah principles, the transaction is permissible. Murabaha and Ijarah are permissible and
there should be no doubt in this regard. When applied by banks, any of the modes may
involve irregularities, making the same non-Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant. In this sense, someone may
label any modes borderline techniques, because a little negligence on the part of the banker
or the client may cause a Shar ¯ı´ah compliance problem. But such problems are faced even in
the case of Musharakah and Mudarabah; should we avoid them for the reason that some IFIs
have not applied the Musharakah conditions in letter and spirit? Certainly not. So the issue is
not one of “debt versus equity” but one of putting greater reliance on equity and subjecting
the debt to the principle of the Shar ¯ı´ah that debt, once created, should not increase as it
increases in the conventional system.
For example, it was due to the careless functioning of Islamic banks in Pakistan in the
1980s that their Murabaha operations involving “buy-back” and “rollover” were merely
a change of name. (This may be possible even now in cases of “windows” operated by
conventional financial institutions without any Shar ¯ı´ah supervision by regulators or Shar ¯ı´ah
advisors.) As a result, the Federal Shariat Court in Pakistan altogether prohibited the use of
Murabaha in its judgement given in November, 1991. The government of Pakistan preferred
an appeal to the Shariat Appellate Bench (SAB) of the Supreme Court of Pakistan, which
allowed the use of Murabaha with the condition that all Shar ¯ı´ah essentials of Murabaha are
applied and banks actually become involved in trading and undertake trading risks.
Similarly, Ijarah is a crucial mode that can be helpful in enhancing capital formation in
an economy. But if banks do not fulfil its conditions relating to risk and reward of the
leased asset, the transaction will not be Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant and the Shar ¯ı´ah advisor would
be justified in rejecting this.
Islamic banks can charge fixed profits/rentals if they engage in trading and leasing; so
much so that if the price or the rental is not fixed in clear terms, the transactions lose validity.
Therefore, the permissibility of debt-creating modes is intact and established. Financing
through these modes, in order to be Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant, is necessarily linked to real sector
activities and, therefore, is a source of productivity and just profitability. Any of the products
or modes should not be questioned simply because some bankers do not fulfil the requisite
Shar¯ı´ah conditions. If an effective Shar ¯ı´ah compliance framework is in operation and the
Shar¯ı´ah advisors and / or regulators are vigilant about the operations of IFIs, their products
should be acceptable.


----- p.444 (pdf 472) -----


444 Understanding Islamic Finance
Suitability of Shirkah-based Modes for Financing
As regards the application of the preferable modes based on Shirkah principles, banks’
management or the regulators may like to issue instructions to the practitioners in the banks
to apply them keeping in mind the risk profile of the fund owners and ground realities of
the business in respective areas. In many areas of business, use of Shirkah-based modes
might not even be possible. A person doing family business may be in need of bridge
finance and not of permanent or long-term funding. His requirement can be met through
trade-based modes or leasing. In some other cases, their use may not be advisable due to
a low-risk profile of the investors. Banks keep depositors’ money as a trust and they are
bound to invest such money according to the wishes or instructions of the depositors, without
compromising on the Shar ¯ı´ah principles. If the depositors are risk-averse, their money will
have to be invested in leasing or trade-based modes. For example, a pensioner or a widow
may require an Islamic banker to invest his/her money in less risky but Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant
business because he or she is not in a position to bear the risk of loss that could arise in
Shirkah-based business. The bank, as a trustee, would be bound to invest the funds of such
risk-averse investors in trade and Ijarah-based activities. Similarly, on the assets side, the
bank’s clients may either not be willing to make the bank a partner in their business or may
not be keeping proper and correct records of the joint business; this may cause loss to the
bank and, in turn, to the savers/investors.
However, it should be accepted that Musharakah and Mudarabah or other PLS products
are the best alternatives to interest. They not only make the capital risk-bearing, a badly
needed factor in growth and development even in developed countries, but also encourage
entrepreneurship. But this should not lead to negation of non-PLS modes, which can also
play a role in capital formation and development of economies. Accordingly, there has been
a gradual change in the approach of Islamic banking experts, and it is being increasingly
felt that all Islamic modes of financing, if properly used in line with their Shar ¯ı´ah-related
requirements, can have a positive role in the development process. Islamic banks, while
functioning on a basis other than interest, have to perform a crucial task of resource mobi-
lization, their efficient allocation on the basis of both PLS and non-PLS categories of modes
and strengthening the payments systems to contribute to economic growth and development.
17.3.8 Islamic Financial Institutions – Banks or Trade Houses?
Islamic banking is also criticized on the basis that banking means intermediation between
savers and borrowers; banks do not deal in real sector business. They facilitate trade and
business, but in that case also they deal in documents only. Islamic banks should not get
involved in trading or other direct business, otherwise they would be exposing themselves to
unnecessary risk and possible loss to the investors and the financial system. But this objection
has no solid base. Even conventional financial business is conducted on the basis of different
structures, namely commercial banks, universal banks, investment banks and other non-
banking finance institutions or companies. In countries like Japan, Germany, Switzerland
and the Netherlands, banks are involved in real sector merchant and universal banking.
Investment banks, mutual funds and other asset management companies are involved in
almost all countries in non-commercial business activities.
Therefore, Islamic banks, which are not supposed to work on a purely financial interme-
diation model, are not something absolutely new and unique in global finance. As lending
and borrowing is not a major activity of IFIs, the universal banking model and investment


----- p.445 (pdf 473) -----


An Appraisal of Common Criticism 445
banking are more suitable for their operation and certainly more useful for the economy and
the society in which they operate. In this structure, they are in a better position to deal with
problems like information asymmetry that the commercial banks working for pure financial
intermediation have to face. Besides, they are in a position to earn a higher profit, enabling
them to pass on higher profits to the depositors. It is normally suggested, therefore, that
Islamic banks should establish trading companies to finance the credit purchases of their
customers. As regards the risk, Islamic finance has the provision of mitigating asset, market
and return-related risks. Further, the banks’ management or the regulators can establish
firewalls so that Islamic financial institutions may avoid unnecessary exposure in various
sectors.
17.3.9 Islamic Banks to Act as Social Welfare Institutions?
Another, less common, criticism of Islamic banking is that IFIs charge the clients a market-
related rate; they should get no return on the facilities they provide and serve as social
security or charity institutions. This does not have any firm basis from the point of view of the
Shar¯ı´ah or economic principles. Giving return-free loans may be an activity of individuals
at their discretion, or of States in some special circumstances. Providing funds by business
institutions without any return is not possible according to the rules of demand and supply.
Where will the funds come from if banks do not give any return to the depositors/investors?
Profit earning is not the issue; the issue is how to earn profit – through interest-based lending
or through real sector business? Islamic banks normally do not lend money; they undertake
real sector business keeping in mind the Shar ¯ı´ah principles.
IFIs have to work as business institutions so as to properly perform the functions of
mobilization and efficient allocation of resources. The myth in some circles that Islamic banks
need to work as social security centres providing charity to the needy and for benevolence
has to be removed, because business and benevolence are two separate things. Individuals
have a right to spend for benevolence out of their incomes, for which they will be rewarded
in this world and in the Hereafter. But banks that hold depositors’ money with a particular
mandate have no right to dishonour the mandate.
Islamic banks will sell goods purchased by them on profit, lease assets against rentals and
share the profit (or bear the loss) accruing from Shirkah-based investments. They will help
society to develop by facilitating asset-based investment and supply of risk-based capital.
The State or the regulators will be required to oversee their functions to ensure that the
interest of various stakeholders is properly safeguarded. Subject to the policies of their
boards and in consultation with stakeholders, they can also take part in social and welfare
activities, but this will not be their normal course of business.
17.4 APPRAISAL OF CRITICISM ON ISLAMIC BANKING
PRACTICE
We analyse various objections and criticism of Islamic banking practices below.
17.4.1 Divergence between Theory and Practice
A number of scholars writing on Islamic banking are of the view that Islamic banks have
deviated to a great extent from their philosophical basis and that the concept of Islamic


----- p.446 (pdf 474) -----


446 Understanding Islamic Finance
banking and finance has changed visibly from the concept envisaged in the second half of the
nineteenth century. In the initial stage of evolution of Islamic banking (the 1940s to the early
1980s), it was considered that, mainly, the profit/loss sharing modes would be the alternative
to interest to rectify the socio-economic injustice caused by the institution of interest. For
example, neither Dr Nejatullah Siddiqi’s Banking without Interest nor Dr Uzair’s Interest-free
Banking make any reference to Murabaha. The Report of the Council of Islamic Ideology,
Pakistan (1980) that is the pioneering work on the subject, allowed the use of Murabaha
only hesitantly and limited its use to unavoidable cases in the transformation process. Shaikh
Muhammad Taqi Usmani writes about Murabaha and Ijarah in the concluding chapter of An
Introduction to Islamic Finance :
“The Shar¯ı´ah scholars have allowed their use for financing purposes only in those spheres where
Musharakah cannot work and that, too, with certain conditions. This allowance should not be taken
as a permanent rule for all sorts of transactions and the entire operations of Islamic banks should
not revolve around it”. 3
Practically, however, Murabaha and Ijarah are being used to a very large extent and the use
of PLS modes is negligible, even in institutions in which the honourable Shaikh serves as
Shar¯ı´ah supervisor or member of the Shar ¯ı´ah board. This divergence has to be seen in the
correct and larger perspective, as this will determine the level of credibility of the emerging
system. As a matter of fact, this phenomenon refers more to evolution of the concept of
Islamic finance than to its divergence. Islamic finance is still evolving on the basis of the
basic philosophy and principles given by the Shar ¯ı´ah.
One major cause of the apparent divergence between theory and practice is the excessive
use of Murabaha, which gives a fixed rate of return to the banks. This has been dubbed
“Murabaha Syndrome”, with an ironic feeling about operations of IFIs. 4 Conceptually speak-
ing, it is not a true feeling. Trading is an accepted activity in the Islamic system and if
the prohibitions and the recommended ethics of business, as identified in the books of
Hadith and jurisprudence, are taken care of, it leads to many facilities for human beings,
growth of wealth and broader distribution of bounties of the Almighty. In many cases, trade
or leasing are the only options. A vast majority of depositors, particularly in developing
countries, are low income people like pensioners, widows and other lower middle class
groups. Their money should not be invested in risky ventures. However, in the case of single
trade transactions or where satisfactory documentation is available, Islamic banks should
use Musharakah, as this will give them higher returns.
17.4.2 IFIs using Interest Income as Seed/Base Capital
Some quarters criticize Islamic banking on the grounds that conventional interest-based
banks are using their interest income for setting up “Islamic windows”, stand-alone Islamic
banking branches (IBBs) or full-fledged Islamic banking institutions. The objection is that
income earned from prohibited sources should not be used for business based on Shar ¯ı´ah
principles. But the argument is ill-founded. If a person doing any prohibited/illegal business
intends, at any time, to stop the wrong-doing, he needs to be encouraged. There must be a
start-up time to transform to valid, good and socially useful activities from illegal, harmful
3 Usmani, 2000a, p. 241.
4 Yousef, 2005.


----- p.447 (pdf 475) -----


An Appraisal of Common Criticism 447
and bad professions. The Qur´ ¯anic verses give the principle that “those who listen to the
order of the Almighty and desist from engaging in interest (in future), may keep their
previously received gains, their case being entrusted to the Almighty (for accountability in
the Hereafter)” (2: 275) and “if you repent (on taking interest), you have the right to get your
principal” (2: 278). This principle gives a clear line of action: income of an interest-based
institution can become the seed capital for an Islamic financial institutio n – a window, a
branch, a full-fledged bank or NBFC. The only requirement is that its operations should be
Shar¯ı´ah-compliant and totally segregated from the interest-based business. Further, in many
cases, the whole capital of the bank would not be the interest income. Initially generated
capital remains a part of it.
A related objection could be that, as per the direction of the Holy Qur´ ¯an, such institutions
should altogether leave the interest-based business and transform their entire operations
to Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant ones. This is the ideal requirement and the policymakers/regulators,
particularly in Muslim majority countries, must have the target of transformation of the whole
system within a well-defined period. But this could have exceptions: a mega multinational
conventional financial institution cannot be expected to transform its whole operations
overnight; but it should certainly be encouraged to launch Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant business at
whatever level it can afford, as this would possibly be a driving force for promotion of the
emerging system across the globe.
17.4.3 Difference between Islamic and Conventional Banking
The most common criticism pertaining to the practice of Islamic banking is that there is no
real difference between the conventional and the Islamic banking operations. The objection
is raised on the following grounds: IFIs charge time value of money on the basis of reference
rates, like the conventional institutions, to earn the same level of income; they do not
actually deal in goods and only facilitate the purchase of goods and services by the clients,
like their counterparts in the conventional system, and thus earn fixed income; they require
collateral from the clients, penalize them in cases of default, give almost the same return
to the depositors and the investors and have never passed any loss to the depositors. The
following sections consider these objections.
Charging Time Value of Money as Conventional Banks Charge
IFIs cannot and generally do not charge the time value of money in the conventional
sense. They have to undertake trading or leasing, for which they can genuinely take into
consideration the time factor for the purpose of pricing of goods or their usufructs, as
discussed in detail in various parts of the book. But once the receivable is created upon
execution of any valid contract, they cannot add anything to the receivable, not only in
debt-creating modes like trade and leasing but also in respect of the profits realized in
Musharakah or Mudarabah. The “cost of funds” in terms of conventional opportunity cost is
not any consideration in Islamic finance. Time value of money is accepted for the purpose
of pricing of goods/usufruct only and not for pricing of money or debts/debt instruments.
Hence, the view that Islamic banks charge time value of money like conventional banks is
a misconception.


----- p.448 (pdf 476) -----


448 Understanding Islamic Finance
Use of Interest Rates as Benchmarks
Use of any interest-related benchmark by Islamic banks is also a subject of criticism. An
important point to be observed in this regard is that benchmark or reference rates are a
genuine need of all types of business. Reference rates may differ from sector to sector,
market to market and time to tim e – a formal market rate would be different from that of
the informal market; a real estate rate would be different from the commodities market rate;
similarly, the financial sector’s rate would be different from that of industry or agriculture.
But any such rate must be there, enabling the related market players to price their goods
and services. Accordingly, IFIs also need reference rates or benchmarks. As the market in
which they have to function is financial, they can use only the financial market’s reference
rate, otherwise there would be distortion or chaos.
A related question could be why don’t Islamic banks develop their own benchmark rates?
It has to be accepted that a benchmark reflective of fictitious assets will not be helpful
in realizing the socio-economic objectives of Islamic banking and finance. But the point
to be noted is that in the present scenario, wherein Islamic banks’ share in the national
and global financial markets is very small, they are obliged to use the benchmark of the
formal conventional market in which they are operating. Governments and big public and
private sector corporations are raising huge funds on the basis of interest. Also, they place
their excess liquidity at the highest possible risk-free rates of return. Even most of the
stocks do not fulfil the screening criteria for Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant investment in shares of
joint stock companies. This is why IFIs are currently using the interest-based benchmarks
in almost all parts of the world. No doubt Islamic banking, which is inherently different
from the conventional system, needs its own benchmarks, but evolving separate rates in
every jurisdiction requires time and sustained efforts, which should remain part of the future
agenda of economists, bankers, policymakers and Shar ¯ı´ah scholars.
For the time being, conventional benchmarks can be used by IFIs because these are used
only as a tool and a basis for pricing the goods or their usufruct, which Shar ¯ı´ah accepts.
A seller can charge any price with the consent of the buyer and to remain competitive in a
market. The use of a conventional benchmark does not mean that Islamic and conventional
banking are similar. As discussed earlier, different subject matters of the two systems (money
in the former and goods in the latter) make a lot of difference in terms of rights and liabilities
of the parties.
Pre-fixed Rates of Return in Islamic Finance
A common myth, particularly among laymen, is that an Islamic financial institution should
charge and give only variable returns on financial accommodation and deposits respectively;
a fixed deposit or facility rate is interest. This myth needs to be removed, as the return
rate depends on the nature of the contract or the agreement. In all transactions, the Shar ¯ı´ah
requirement is that one should sufficiently know what one is giving and getting in exchange
in a contract. This implies that certainty about the subject matter and its exchange value,
transparency, disclosure and free consent of the parties for entering into the contracts are
important factors in Islamic business and finance.
It all depends on the nature of the transaction. In a money transaction or a debt, no fixed
or floating/variable charge can be taken. If the deposits with a bank are in the form of a loan,
as in the case of current account liabilities of banks, they should carry no return. Deposits
mobilized on the basis of Mudarabah should generate a variable return for both the bank


----- p.449 (pdf 477) -----


An Appraisal of Common Criticism 449
and the depositors. In the case of loss on such deposits, the depositor’s capital will decrease
while the bank will not be able to get any return against its services as fund manager. If
deposits are managed on a Wakalatul Istism ¯ar basis, the bank will charge a fixed fee, while
the depositor will take the entire profit or bear the loss, if any.
The rule that one should sufficiently know what one is giving and what one is getting in
exchange in a contract implies that the price or the rent has to be fixed with certainty. In the
case of trade, Islamic banks are required to fix the price once and for all and, therefore, they
can charge a fixed profit in Murabaha, while in Salam, the bank’s return depends on the
price at which it is able to market the Salam commodity. In Ijarah, the rental has to be fixed,
otherwise the transaction is void. But, as the lessor has to bear the ownership-related risks
and expenses, the net return to the bank as lessor or to the Ijarah Sukuk holders is quasi-
fixed and not absolutely fixed. On money lending or debt-based instruments, Islamic banks
cannot get any return. Shirkah-based investments can be attached to fixed earning modes like
trade and Ijarah. Examples are Diminishing Musharakah on the basis of Shirkatulmilk and
securitization through Ijarah and Shirkah. Islamic investment products can be structured in
such a way that investors get a variable or quasi-fixed return. Hence, fixity of charge per se
is not an issue; it all depends on the nature of any transaction or its result and implications.
A linked objection in respect of rates is that although Islamic banks get deposits on the
basis of Mudarabah, they have never passed on any loss to the depositors. The factual position
is that IFIs constitute a number of pools of deposits, and investments on the basis of sharing
and debt-creating modes are made out of the respective pools, keeping in mind the principle
of diversification. The greater the pool and broader the level of diversification, the lower
the possibility of loss to the bank and, in turn, to the pool members. For example, a pool
belonging to one thousand depositors of different categories (tenors) has to be invested; the
bank invests in four, five or even more sectors/subsectors of the economy by facilitating 200
entrepreneurs on the basis of various modes like Murabaha, Ijarah, Diminishing Musharakah
and Musharakah, by observing all risk management tools. As a result, in many cases of trade
and leasing, the bank will be earning a prestipulated return; in the case of Shirkah-based
financing, it may incur loss in a few cases, while in most cases, it will earn a profit, as it has
applied all risk mitigation tools allowed by the Shar ¯ı´ah. Even if it has to incur loss in respect
of a few cases or some of the receivables come under default, it will be earning a profit
on an overall basis. The overall profit earned from the pool is distributed between the pool
and the bank (Mudarib) and then the pool’s share is distributed among the pool members
on the basis of average daily products and the weightages assigned to each category at the
beginning of the period. 5 If a projected rate of profit is indicated in advance, it has no impact
on the final profit distribution; only the net realized amount has to be distributed on the basis
of pre-agreed criteria and the bank has a limited “tool kit” to make up the shortfall, if any.
We can say, therefore, that any loss has to be charged to the pool, but the profit earned
by the bank in most cases covers the loss. Further, IFIs can create reserves from the profits,
from which any losses in the future can be met.
Another important aspect is that Islamic banks are business entities for the purpose of
earning profit. They are required to be more prudent businessmen than their counterparts in
the conventional set-up, as they are holding public money as a trust. All businesses avoid loss
by way of proper management and risk mitigation tools. Likewise, Islamic banks holding
5 The procedure of deposit management on the basis of Shirkah has been described in Chapter 8, Section 8.5.2.


----- p.450 (pdf 478) -----


450 Understanding Islamic Finance
depositors’ money as a trust are required to apply all legal and possible measures to avoid
losses.
Conclusive fixity of return on various types of Sukuk is, of course, a critical issue. We have
discussed this matter in detail in Chapter 15 (Section 15.3.7). The gist of the discussion is
that “fixed-income” securities or Sukuk in the sense of conventional investment instruments
are not possible in Islamic finance. The prospectus to issue any Sukuk/certificates (not only
those which are Shirkah-based) must not contain any clause that the issuer is liable to
compensate the certificate holders up to the nominal value in situations other than torts and
negligence, or that he guarantees a fixed percentage of profit. In Shirkah-based Sukuk, only
an independent third party can provide guarantee without any remuneration for the capital
or any profit. But the third party’s commitment does not create the right for beneficiaries
to relate the Shirkah contract with fulfilment of the guarantee. In the case of inability or
refusal by the third party to perform as per commitment, the Sukuk holders cannot claim
for redress on the grounds that they had purchased the Sukuk taking into account the third
party’s undertaking to guarantee the profit or the capital. 6
In the case of Ijarah or mixed portfolio Sukuk, there could be default in receipt of Murabaha
receivables; in leases, there is the possibility both of ownership-related expenses and default
in receipt of the due rental. The owner/lessor of the asset may assure the purchaser (Sukuk
holder), while selling it to the SPV, about the performance of the lessees, as in the case of
IDB Trust. But what should be the course of action if the asset is destroyed without any
fault or negligence of the lessee? This loss has to be borne by the lessor – Sukuk holders. In
the case of Murabaha or other receivables, the SPV may have recourse to the institution that
has undertaken the underlying transactions, but even then there could be shortfalls. Hence,
the return rate can be quasi-fixed but not fixed in any way in respect of any category of
Sukuk. Therefore, the matter should be taken care of for integrity and sustained support for
the emerging financial system.
Actual Involvement in Real Sector Business
Islamic banks are also criticized on the grounds that they are not actually involved in real
sector business. This is not true; Islamic banks have to be involved in real business, with
all its implications, as they are not allowed to charge cost of funds or rent on money in
short-, medium- or long-term loans, overdrafts, guarantees, financing against bills, receiv-
ables or other instruments or sell their debt instruments. The most strategic difference
between Islamic and conventional rules is that, in the latter case, both items of exchange
in a transaction can be delayed/deferred and the goods purchased, and even the “options”
can be sold onward without taking ownership of the underlying assets and possession of
the related risk. In Islamic finance, only one of the items of an exchange contract can be
delayed while delivery/possession of the item of exchange has to be given and taken, as stip-
ulated in the contract, along with transfer of the risk to the buyer. Islamic banks’ operations
involve exchange of goods for money, which may take a number of forms like simultaneous
exchange on the spot, spot delivery with deferred payment and spot payment with deferred
delivery.
The subject matter of Islamic banking is goods; IFIs use money only as a medium of
exchange for purchasing the goods for the purpose of leasing or selling onward, thereby
6 AAOIFI, 2004–5a, Standard on Musharakah, clause 3/1/4/3.


----- p.451 (pdf 479) -----


An Appraisal of Common Criticism 451
earning rental or profit. As discussed in Chapters 4 and 5, they have to virtually purchase a
commodity, take it into ownership and possession, necessarily implying transfer of ownership
risk to them; only then are they entitled to earn a profit by selling it onward. After execution
of the sale, asset risk is transferred to the clients, who are bound to pay the price at the
settled time. In Salam, the bank has to take delivery of the goods purchased in advance,
irrespective of a fall or rise in their price. In Istisna‘a, the manufacturer delivers the asset to
the bank along with all asset-related and market risks. In Ijarah, ownership of leased assets
remains with the banks and according to well-established rules of the Shar ¯ı´ah, risk also
remains with them.
Islamic banks, however, do not and cannot maintain inventory of all the goods they trade
in; they are not grocery stores. Neither is it a Shar ¯ı´ah requirement that a person should
necessarily place the wares on counters of a store before selling it onward. The procedure
that IFIs may purchase the goods for onward sale upon requisition of the clients is based on
very common real sector business practice and, therefore, is acceptable from the Shar ¯ı´ah
angle. Accordingly, the Shar ¯ı´ah Standard on Murabaha prepared by the AAOIFI has been
named the Standard on Murabaha to Purchase Orderer.
Making the client an agent for the purchase or sale of goods by Islamic banks is also
accepted in the Shar ¯ı´ah without any difference of opinion. Goods held by an agent are in
the risk of the principal so long as any negligence or breach of trust on the part of the agent
is not proved. It seems to be preferable that Islamic banks establish some asset management
or trading companies that may maintain inventories of the commonly required goods and
assets for undertaking merchant banking; but it is neither possible to keep inventory of all
the goods and brands of goods required by the clients, nor is it a Shar ¯ı´ah condition for the
genuine business of trade and Ijarah.
Taking Security/Collateral and Documentation
Another objection raised is that Islamic banks, like their counterparts in the conventional
system, take collateral/security in all financing, also including Musharakah/Mudarabah.
A related objection is that Islamic banks ask for too much documentation. It is misunderstood
that IFIs should facilitate their clients on the assets side without any requirement of collateral.
In principle, this objection is baseless. Islamic banks are commercial institutions; they can
take pledge/collateral to the level of their satisfaction for recovery of their receivables. 7
As IFIs deal in goods and create receivables, they need collateral and also documentation
more than the conventional institutions need. The Holy Qur´ ¯an and Sunnah emphasize
documentation, transparency and collateral in all credit transactions, as we have discussed
in detail in Chapter 7. The Holy Qur´ ¯an enjoins one to write down and take witnesses in
all transactions that involve credit one way or another. Similarly, the holy Prophet (pbuh)
encouraged disclosure of all features of goods being traded and the competitive environment
in which people get sufficient information about the goods and their prices in the market.
Hence, in all debt-creating modes, banks may ask the client to furnish security in the form
of a mortgage, a lien or a charge on any of his assets. In forward purchase, banks can ask
the client to furnish security to ensure that he shall deliver the commodity on the agreed
date. In PLS modes as well, the bank can ask for a guarantee against negligence or breach
of the contract; but the bank will not be entitled to enforce the collateral if a loss in the
7 Wilson, 2002, pp. 210, 211.


----- p.452 (pdf 480) -----


452 Understanding Islamic Finance
business has occurred without any misconduct or negligence on the part of the client who is
a partner of the bank.
Practically, however, there may be a requirement that, in certain cases, the condition
relating to collateral be relaxed to enable clients of small means to conduct some micro-
level business. Experience has shown that small businesses and the middle class clients of
financial institutions do not adopt dilatory practices in payment of their liabilities. Therefore,
IFIs should also launch some schemes to facilitate the unemployed and poor people to start
some business to earn sustenance on the basis of personal and/or group sureties.
Risk Profile of Islamic Banks
Another misconception is that Islamic banks, like conventional banks, do not take on risk;
they adopt modes and techniques such that they are able to get targeted income, as in the
case of conventional banking. The point to be emphasized in this regard is that risk-taking
and risk management are two different aspects. Islamic banking involves risk-taking by its
very nature; risk can be minimized by way of valid risk management tools but not totally
avoided or eliminated. Conventional banks give and take risk-free returns in the sense that
the principal and an addition over it in the form of interest is guaranteed; depositors and
the banks are entitled to get the full amount of the loan along with interest. If an amount
goes into default, it is due to a management/governance problem, as the contractual right
to receive the amount remains intact. This is not the case in Islamic finance; IFIs have to
conduct real business, as a result of which they may earn a profit or incur a loss, and hence
they take on risk.
The additional risks that Islamic financial institutions have to face as compared to conven-
tional institutions are asset risk, market risk, Shar ¯ı´ah-non-compliance risk, greater rate of
return risks, greater fiduciary risks and greater legal risks. Asset risk is involved in all modes,
particularly in Murabaha (before onward sale to the client), Salam (after taking delivery
from the Salam seller) and Ijarah, as all ownership-related risks belong to the bank so long
as the asset is in its ownership; if the asset is damaged without any fault on the part of the
lessee and it is not able to deliver the normally intended benefit, the bank’s right to get rental
will cease. In Shirkah-based modes, risk is borne as per the share in the ownership. Market
risk is involved as the bank might not be able to market the goods purchased on the basis of
Salam, Istisna‘a, etc. at a profitable price. Rate of return risk is involved as the price, once
fixed in Murabaha/Salam, cannot be increased. Remaining within the Shar ¯ı´ah principles,
Islamic banks are allowed to take risk mitigation/management measures. But transfer of risk
to anyone else without transferring related reward is not permissible. Therefore, the criticism
that Islamic banks, like conventional banks, do not take business risk is not valid.
Identical End Result of Conventional and Islamic Banking
Islamic banking is also criticized on the grounds that the end results of Islamic banking
operations are the same as those of conventional banking. Apparently, this may be true, for
the reason that IFIs are using the same benchmarks, working in a competitive environment
and, as such, are not in a position to give or charge rates significantly different from those
of the conventional banks. The financial sector’s benchmarks make the administration and
regulation by the banks’ management and the regulators easy, effective and transparent.
Hence, Islamic banks generally use the benchmarks that conventional institutions use. But


----- p.453 (pdf 481) -----


An Appraisal of Common Criticism 453
mere use of a benchmark does not imply that the end result will be the same. While
conventional banks use a benchmark for pricing their lending or money-based transactions,
Islamic banks use them for pricing of goods, their usufruct and services; and this feature
makes a lot of difference between the two systems. Islamic banks will not be able to create
money out of nothing or without the backing of real assets, as is the case in the conventional
system. They can only securitize their asset-based operations for the purpose of generating
liquid funds, transferring thereby their ownership to the security holders along with their risk
and reward. Financing government budget deficits by Islamic banks and financial institutions
will not be possible until the governments have sufficient real assets for raising funds in
a Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant manner or for the conversion of debt stock into Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant
securities. (The issue of money creation is discussed in detail in Chapter 4, Section 4.7.3.)
The two systems are different even in respect of commercial operations. While conven-
tional institutions provide loans for consumption or for purchasing raw materials/finished
goods/assets and keep on charging interest so long as the receivable is not paid, Islamic banks
sell the relevant asset/commodity after taking its ownership and risk at one stipulated price
that remains the same even in the case of default. In leasing, they bear the ownership-related
risks and expenses. If the leased asset is destroyed for any reason other than the negligence
of the lessee, they incur the loss and if the amount received from insurance/Takaful is not
sufficient to cover the whole loss, they cannot claim the difference from the lessee. Similarly,
in Salam they receive the goods and if they have to get back the prepaid price for any reason,
they cannot claim any “cost of funds” for use of money by the Salam seller.
Therefore, it is not true to say that the end result of the practices of Islamic and conventional
banks is the same, so long as Islamic banks fulfil the Shar ¯ı´ah requirements of Islamic modes
of business. Islamic finance enhances the supply of risk-based capital and helps in capital
formation in the economy, which ultimately benefits the general public, while conventional
finance tends to create individuals who earn money from money without participation in
real business activities – making the rich richer and the poor poorer.
IFIs’ Combined and Complicated Contracts
Another point of criticism regarding Islamic banking is that IFIs combine a number of
contracts in respect of one overall transaction, while, as per the theory of Islamic finance,
entering into “two contracts for one contract” is prohibited. But the factual Shar ¯ı´ah position
is that only two interdependent agreements are prohibited. The combination of some contracts
is permissible subject to certain conditions. Shirkah and Ijarah can be combined, meaning
that a partner can give his part of ownership in an asset on lease to any co-partners, as
in the case of Diminishing Musharakah. In contrast, Bai‘ and Ijarah are two contracts of
totally different impacts; while in Bai‘, ownership and risk are transferred to the buyer, in
Ijarah, neither ownership nor risk is transferred from the lessor to the lessee. It is necessary,
therefore, that lease and sale are kept as separate agreements. However, one of the parties
can undertake a unilateral promise to sell, buy or gift the asset at the termination of the
lease. This will not be binding on the other party. Similarly, sale of ownership units to the
client in Diminishing Musharakah will have to be kept totally separate, requiring “offer and
acceptance” for each unit and the partners will bear the pro rata risk on the basis of share in
ownership at any point of time.
Musharakah and Mudarabah can also be combined. For example, banks manage depositors’
funds on the basis of Mudarabah; they can deploy their own funds in the business with the


----- p.454 (pdf 482) -----


454 Understanding Islamic Finance
condition that the ratio of profit for a sleeping partner shall not be more than the ratio that
its capital has in the total capital.
Contracts of agency (Wakalah) and suretyship (Kafalah) can also be combined with sale
or lease contracts, with the condition that rights and liabilities arising from various contracts
are taken as per their respective rules.
Islamic banks can structure products by combining different modes, subject to the fulfil-
ment of their respective conditions. For example, they can combine Salam or Istisna‘a with
Murabaha for preshipment export financing. Diminishing Musharakah is a combination of
Shirkah and Ijarah added by an undertaking by one party to periodically sell/purchase the
ownership to/from the other partner. In all major contracts like Musharakah, Ijarah, Salam and
Istisna‘a, Islamic banks enter into promise and agency contracts with the clients or any third
parties. This is acceptable in Shar ¯ı´ah provided all agreements and accessory contracts are
independently enforceable with their implications. However, interdependent agreements or
stipulations leading to uncertainty about rights and liabilities of the contracting parties cannot
be made.
Taking Binding Promises from Clients
Some scholars have criticized Islamic banks for treating the “promise to purchase” by the
client as binding. But as it does not involve violation of any Shar ¯ı´ah principle, mainstream
Islamic finance theory has declared it binding, keeping in mind the practical problems in
finalization of contracts (see Chapter 5, Section 5.6). Keeping in mind the intricacies of
present-day business, particularly when conducted by Islamic banks, contemporary scholars
have reached the consensus that promise by one party in economic/financial transactions is
enforceable by law until and unless the promisor is not in a position to fulfil it on account
of any force majeure. If nonfulfilment is due to any wilful act of the promisor, he shall have
to make good the loss to the promisee.
The rationale behind this consensus decision is that, in many cases, binding promises
become a genuine requirement, fulfilment of which does not amount to violation of any
basic Shar¯ı´ah tenet. This has important implications for Islamic banks’ operations in respect
of Murabaha to Purchase Orderer, Ijarah Muntahia-bi-Tamleek, Diminishing Musharakah
and for the disposal of goods purchased by banks under Salam/Istisna‘a. As it does not
contradict any Nass (text) of the Qur´ ¯an or Sunnah, it can be accepted on the principle of
Ib¯ahatul Asliyah (all economic activities that are not prohibited are valid/permissible).
17.4.4 Imposing Penalties on Defaulters
Imposing late payment penalties by Islamic banks is also subject to criticism. The argument
is that while the Holy Qur´ ¯an recommends giving more time to debtors and even waiving
the debt, IFIs impose penalties on a percentage per annum basis. As a result, the cost of
financing for the clients is the same as in the case of conventional banks, or perhaps higher.
Islamic banks should, therefore, give extra time without any extra charge.
Default is one of the major challenges facing the financial industry across the globe. The
conventional system has a built-in tool for controlling default, as the defaulters are charged
interest that becomes part of the income of the conventional financial institutions. IFIs have
been allowed by the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars to charge penalties to defaulters in order to discipline
them, but the penalty amount has to be spent on charity and cannot become part of the
income of the bank.


----- p.455 (pdf 483) -----


An Appraisal of Common Criticism 455
The situation is not so simple. Most of the banks’ clients on the assets side are resourceful
businessmen. They do not pay their dues to the banks, while they continue their luxurious
lifestyles. In such cases, they are not covered under the idea of debtors in difficulty being
entitled to relaxation or waiver. While full and timely repayment of debts cannot be overem-
phasized in Islamic economics and finance, we have to differentiate between wilful and
actual default arising due to real economic problems faced by the debtors. As per Shar ¯ı´ah
rules, wilful defaulters are like usurpers who are made to return any profit, along with the
property, made by them on the usurped property.
We also have to differentiate between Qard and Dayn, as the jurists have approved
imposing penalties in the latter case only. This means that, in the case of a loan (Qard),
the creditor should give more time, while if the liability to pay has been created due to any
business transaction – sale or Ijarah transactions – and the client is delaying the payment
by resorting to negligent tactics, he can be required to pay a fine, which goes to charity,
and even to compensate the bank for the actual loss (see Chapter 7, Section 7.13). In this
regard, the OIC Fiqh Council has resolved that penalty provision should become null and
void when a client proves that his failure to meet an obligation was due to a reason beyond
his control, or when he proves that, as a result of his breach of the contract, the bank has
incurred no loss.
Default in settlement of liabilities has become a socio-economic evil of the present age,
due mainly to the unjust principles of the capitalistic and interest-based system and legal
loopholes. In the Islamic framework, debtors are not given such latitude that while asset-wise
they are billionaires, they do not pay the liabilities on account of some legal loopholes.
As Islamic banks have to work in the same overall environment, Shar ¯ı´ah scholars allow
them to impose penalties in case of default, as the default hits them more than it hits the
conventional institutions. They cannot claim “cost of funds” or liquidated damages as the
conventional banks can charge. As default is injurious to the deposit holders, IFIs need to
take every possible step to minimize its possibility.
17.4.5 Availability of Cash for Overhead Expenses and Deficit Financing
Another criticism made of Islamic finance is that, if money has always to be linked to real
assets, how will the needs of cash for overhead expenses and for deficit financing be fulfilled?
Islamic finance has a number of modes/instruments on the basis of which liquidity needs
can be properly fulfilled. Forward sales like Salam/Salaf and Istisna‘a are the best examples.
A producer of homogeneous goods can genuinely sell his production in advance, and thus
use the cash received for any consumption or business purposes. Needs of governments and
the corporate sector can be met by issuance of Shirkah- or Ijarah-based Sukuk. Therefore,
this criticism is no longer valid.
17.4.6 Socio-economic Impact of the Present Islamic Banking System
Last but not least is the criticism that Islamic banking and finance in the present structure
is not capable of achieving the socio-economic goals of an Islamic economy, as claimed in
theory. Some of the pioneers have expressed their deep concern over the neglect of equity-
based modes and the general prevalence of debt-creating modes. The concern is justifiable
to the extent that if IFIs continue to work in the competitive environment without much
support by States, policymakers and the regulators, as is the case at present, they may not


----- p.456 (pdf 484) -----


456 Understanding Islamic Finance
be able to realize the objectives of an Islamic financial system as visualized by its pioneers,
even in the long term.
But some are harsher and consider the present Islamic banking “an attempt to legit-
imize conventional Western banking by distorting the Shar ¯ı´ah”.8 It seems that the writers
who make such remarks might not have tried to gain sufficient awareness about the con-
cepts and philosophy of Islamic economics and finance (notwithstanding their scholarship
in some other areas). Further, they should take into consideration “the tricky issues that
the present generation of humanity faces in following divine guidance” (as remarked by
Dr M. Nejatullah Siddiqi in his response to the article by Dr Asad Zaman; Ahmad and
Siddiqi 2006). Responding to the above criticism, Professor Khurshid Ahmad says: “We
all are concerned that systematic and sustained movement in that direction (equity-based
economy) is yet to be made. It would be a tragedy if the Islamic movement does not move
in that direction. But it would be less than generous to condemn the whole effort and regard
it as an exercise in legitimization of the interest-based banking model.”
Further, banking is only one part of an economy; public finance also has to follow a
just and equitable system for getting the real benefit. The scope and need for the use of
equity-based modes will be discussed in the final chapter, “The Way Forward”.
17.5 CONCLUSION
The emerging system is subject to a number of myths and severe criticism, not only by
those who do not accept the prohibition of interest but also by those “pious” people – both
laymen and the well-educated/elite – who visualize an ideal system without giving any
weightage to the evolutionary challenges and teething problems and difficulties. The concept
and philosophy of Islamic finance is based on sound reasoning and is being accepted by an
increasing number of people across the globe. What the practitioners need to do is to create
awareness so as to remove the myths among the public.
As regards Islamic banking practice, IFIs need to apply stringent internal controls to
avoid systemic and operational risks. Training of the operational staff at all levels, aimed at
enhancing their vision, confidence and commitment, is a prerequisite for sustainable growth
of the new discipline. They must find ways and means to apply equity-based modes, keeping
in mind the risk profile of the fund owners and the nature of business on the financing side.
A starting point in this direction may be financing of consignment-based trade practices,
micro-business operations, Shirkah-based securitization and fund management.
Taking collateral and security is entirely valid for Islamic banks. However, they must
also facilitate the clients who are capable of doing any profitable business but are not in
a position to offer any tangible collateral, to enable them to start some business to earn
sustenance on the basis of personal and/or group sureties.
8 Zaman, 2006. For a response to this by Professor Khurshid Ahmad and Dr Nejatullah Siddiqi, see Ahmad, Khurshid, 2006 and
Siddiqi, 2006b.

