
----- p.457 (pdf 485) -----


18
The Way Forward
18.1 INTRODUCTION
As indicated in the Introduction to the book, I believe the socio-economic problems facing
mankind today have emanated from the unbridled creation of fictitious assets, particularly
reserve currencies, and the unhindered forces of demand and supply with exploitative tools
of “sovereignty” of individuals, “unfettered self-interest” and the “interest”-based corrupt
financial system. Human beings could have avoided massive losses to life and property had
the creation of fictitious monetary assets not been so easy and rampant. 1 The solution lies
in disciplining the creation of money, limiting self-interest with social interest and business
ethics, and transforming the corrupt financial system to make it free from exploitation and
games of chance, thus enabling mankind to optimally use the resources for benefits on a
larger scale. Islamic finance provides a solid basis for these reformatory measures; it is up
to human beings how they realize the potential.
The book has discussed mainly the latter part, i.e. how the financial system can be made
friendly to human societies rather than individuals or a few strong and powerful players.
This concluding chapter comprises observations and recommendations on two aspects:
1. Taking macro-level policy measures to discipline the financial matters of States, corporate
bodies and the financial institutions, with the objective of discontinuing, in phases, the
creation of fictitious assets.
2. How to develop the financial system on a sustainable basis on the principles and phi-
losophy of Islamic finance, which essentially revolves around real tangible assets and
business ethics cherished by humanity as a whole. 2
18.2 AGENDA FOR THE POLICYMAKERS
The Islamic theory of finance possesses a huge potential in terms of its principles and
instruments, which allow the minimum possible number of loopholes. Enhanced supply of
risk-related permanent and redeemable capital – the most powerful fuel for the engines
of modern economies – restricted risk-taking (implied in the prohibition of gambling and
Gharar), a balanced return-rate structure based on real-asset-backed economic activities and
supply of money commensurate with prospects of growth in an economy provide a sound
basis for sustainable development and evenly shared income for the socio-economic benefit
1 For example, in recent wars, financed in the main by deficit financing or the creation of (reserve) money, hundreds of thousands
of human beings have lost their lives without any fault on their part. According to independent sources, the cost of the Iraq War
has been projected at about 1 trillion US Dollars (see http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/11880954/).
2 Readers are recommended to review the first chapter for this.


----- p.458 (pdf 486) -----


458 Understanding Islamic Finance
of mankind as a whole. Advancement of societies in the long run depends on sharing
knowledge and exchange of philosophies to choose the best of them on merit. It is for
the policymakers and the world leaders to determine how to benefit from knowledge and
wisdom, from wherever it is available.
In a survey of Islamic banking, the South magazine, in its issue of November, 1986,
reported that:
“Islamic banking, as the system is widely known, was first ridiculed in the West as a fundamentalist
phenomenon, then just tolerated. Now, after careful scrutiny, it is being adopted in Western financing
institutions and other interest-based commercial banks in the Muslim world. Islamic bankers have
survived the credibility crisis and are no longer basking in the glory of divine revelation. After the
splendid development since then, Islamic banks and other financial institutions have become more
pragmatic and scientific”. 3
This was two decades back, but now the situation has enormously improved. It has
provided good opportunities for the developed countries to tap into Muslim countries of
the Middle East and also the Muslim minority markets. Asset-based Islamic banking that
requires rigorous self-regulation as a part of Shar ¯ı´ah compliance and specific emphasis on
ethical premises is expected to strengthen the internal controls in financial institutions and
promote soundness of the financial system.
If applied widely at a global level, it could be instrumental in achieving balanced growth
of national and global economies due to fewer spill-over effects that lead to excessive money
and credit creation, as per the practice currently in vogue. It is possible, if the opinion makers
and the intelligentsia initiate a well-thought-out movement, to persuade the economists of
repute, particularly those sitting in the IMF and the World Bank and the policymakers
in governments, to reframe the national and global trade and finance systems on just and
equitable bases.
Already, a large number of influential people are talking of green finance and ethical
investments. The strategy has to be framed to enhance the demand of such asset-based
finances in all parts of the world. Islamic finance is well-placed to serve this purpose because
transparency, justice and fulfilment of social responsibilities are among its core values. It has
the potential to become an alternative model for the global system, beneficial to all societies
and for close interaction between Muslim and non-Muslim societies. At an international
level, the following measures may be required:
1. Increasing the number of reserve currencies in the global payments system for the
purpose of diversification, which would require not only enhancing the role of the Euro
and strong currencies like those of Japan and China, but also developing other regional
or group-based reserve currencies. For example, regional currencies could be developed
for inter-regional payments in South-East Asia, the Far East, Central Asia, the Middle
East, Africa, Latin America and others; the OIC would be the best forum to develop
such a strong and widely acceptable reserve currency acceptable on the wider scale in the
world. International financial institutions should facilitate the development of multireserve
currencies if the objective of avoiding possible turmoil in global finance and developing
the world economy on sound footings is to be achieved. For the long-term betterment,
the USA should also be required to help such a move for the future of its own people and
3 South, London, November, 1986.


----- p.459 (pdf 487) -----


The Way Forward 459
human society at large. 4 There should be an international conference like the one that
was held in Bretton Woods in 1945 to discuss matters relating to the creation of reserves
and of national currencies on merit.
2. Money and credit creation should be commensurate with real sector development in all
economies. The economists must devise strategies such that an increase in monetary assets
is matched by the real assets in an economy, with a possible allowance for realizing the
growth potential of respective assets, businesses and economies during the related plan
period. This has to be particularly observed in the case of currencies used for international
payments. In other words, the issuance of the certificates of investment/financial assets
must be based on real assets and their potential growth. For this purpose, the principles of
Sukuk issue in Islamic finance can be of great help in transforming the basis for creating
financial assets from thin air to some underlying real assets.
3. Loan-based finance leads to the squandering of wealth due to corrupt practices ostensibly
resorted to by officials of the donors and also the recipient countries/institutions. Such
finance must be replaced by (i) direct investment in commodity-producing or service
sectors; (ii) project-based financing under strictly observed transparent standards; (iii)
portfolio investments by sovereigns and multinational corporate bodies to strengthen
equity markets in the recipient countries; and (iv) granting return-free loans or “in kind”
assistance in the case of large-scale natural calamities in any part of the world, ensuring
transparency and proper distribution among the affected people. Interest-based financial
aid to the affected countries is fatal for their economies and could adversely affect the
flow of global finance in the long run. 5
4. “Foreign aid” or other forms of financial assistance to the poorer nations of the world
must take the form of financial help, with the affected country benefiting rather tangibly,
by controlling any corrupt commercial behaviour of the donor agencies as well as officials
in the recipient countries.
5. If projected properly, Islamic finance should have appeal to followers of all religions.
By introducing it as religious and / or ethical banking in all societies of the world,
Islamic finance can become an engine of economic growth by mobilizing savings from
so-far untapped groups of people and channelling them to healthy and real-asset based
investments. The prohibition of Riba in all revealed religions could be instrumental in
enhancing this appeal.
18.2.1 Muslim States and Islamic Finance
While Islamic principles of finance have proved their viability worldwide, and individual
Islamic financial institutions and giant multinational groups are queuing to exploit the
potential benefits, Muslim countries are not yet playing any effective role in the promotion
of Islamic finance as a policy objective at the state level. Only one or two countries may
be considered exceptions. To reiterate, the foundations of the asset-based and risk-related
financial system have been laid down and it has already passed the significant milestones of
4 The observations of John Perkins in Confessions of an Economic Hitman , as briefly given in the first chapter, may be kept in
mind. Readers may like to study pages xi–xiv and 211–225 of his book. To quote another of his observations: “Admitting to a
problem is the first step towards finding a solution. Confessing a sin is the beginning of redemption. Let this book, then, be the
start of our salvation. Let it inspire us to new levels of dedication and drive us to realize our dream of balanced and honorable
societies”. (p. xiv).
5 For details see Chapra, 2002, pp. 219–235.


----- p.460 (pdf 488) -----


460 Understanding Islamic Finance
having a rational and sound theoretical basis and increasingly wider acceptance at a global
level. The measures required for building an all-pervasive structure of finance and making it
free from injustice and anomalies include the creation of asset-based money and promoting
retail and corporate financial services on the basis of fair play and risk-sharing.
Almost all Islamic countries are still borrowing through the conventional interest-based
system and only a negligible part of their needs has been financed through Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant
instruments. The firm edict of the Shar ¯ı´ah people against fixed-income securities, however,
does not allow the use of conventional investment instruments. In realizing the real potential
of Islamic finance, experimented and proved in recent years, these countries have to set a
precedent for other countries of the world. The OIC or IDB may formulate financial packages
for member countries, obliging them to resort to asset-based financing on the basis of Ijarah,
Istisna‘a and Shirkah. If applied wholeheartedly on a larger scale, these modes of business
and investment have the possibility of being used as an efficient alternative to interest-based
deficit financing, along with the added benefit of disciplining fiscal behaviour. In such a
case, each economy would be able to get real benchmarks for the pricing of goods, their
usufruct and services, both in cash and credit markets, representing the real demand/supply
scenario and the strength of the economy. Obtaining a benchmark for Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant
securities in the present situation is almost impossible. This is why, IFIs are currently obliged
to adopt the interest-based benchmarks in almost all parts of the world, making the integrity
of their operations vulnerable.
If Islamic finance theory is adopted for retail and/or corporate banking on a smaller or
larger scale, and not for the financial system as a whole, i.e. the governments continue
to generate funds primarily from the conventional markets, it is not likely to have any
visible impact on any economies of the world or their general populations. Accordingly, the
economists and the policymakers are required to come out with confidence and dynamism
against the syndrome of allowing the creation of monetary assets without any meaningful
limit on the one hand and allowing a fixed rent on such assets on the other; and be encouraged
to adopt the real economic activity-based regimes that allow ex post profit- or loss-sharing
and fixed or quasi-fixed returns through pricing of real goods, assets or their usufruct. This
would require some bold measures that, of course, are not novel, as these are being taken in
many economies in various parts of the world.
The conventional financial system has developed through a prolonged and continuous
process, moving away from gold to the electronic medium of exchange. Correcting it to
make it really helpful for human beings, just and conflict-free would also take a long time.
However, the process of change has to be started with sincerity. Putting it on the right track
would require a lot of work and sacrifice by present generations for the bright and safe
future of mankind.
To transform whole economies and make them Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant, sooner or later the
policymakers and planners will need well-defined phases and well-thought-out plans with
committed and sustained efforts. This will require (i) identification of transformation require-
ments in terms of laws, rules, regulations and institutional structures in different jurisdic-
tions, and components of policies fitting into the overall implementation timetable; (ii)
laying down a phased plan and the implementation mechanism; and (iii) feedback or con-
tinuous review and evaluation in order to ensure proper application and to remove any
obstacles.
Application of a real-asset-based financial system by only a few countries could cause a
critical problem for them, due to exogenous factors responsible for an increase in money


----- p.461 (pdf 489) -----


The Way Forward 461
supply if most of the major economies of the world continue the present practices of money
creation. To some extent, this problem can be tackled by facilitating closer linkages between
the exogenous money and policies of the State in respect of capital flow, investment in the
public and private sectors, fiscal, trade and pricing policies and the effective over-seeing
role of the State.
18.3 POTENTIAL, ISSUES AND CHALLENGES FOR ISLAMIC
BANKING
In this section we shall discuss the issues, potential and challenges for Islamic banking and
how best it can meet such challenges. Islamic finance has rapidly grown from a highly
specialized niche market into a multi-billion dollar global industry, expected to continue
double-digit growth in the coming decades. Islamic retail banks and non-bank financial
institutions operating across the world already number in the hundreds, in both Muslim
majority and Muslim minority countries. The IFIs’ product portfolio has significantly grown
on account of innovative products, both for retail and corporate operations. Financial insti-
tutions of the West and America, including Citigroup, Deutsche Bank, ABN AMRO, HSBC
and UBS, are increasingly offering products based on the Shar ¯ı´ah principles. 6
The experiences of Islamic banks in Kuwait, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Britain and
in other parts of the world point towards tangible success in the areas of product innovation,
venture capital, equity finance, finance for trade, housing and other consumer needs and
international syndication for trade and project finance deals. Owing to the growing amount
of funds available with Islamic banks, refining of Islamic financing techniques and the
huge requirement of infrastructure development in Muslim countries, there has been a large
number of project finance agreements in the recent past, particularly in the Middle East
region. Islamic banks now participate in a wide range of financing, stretching from simple
Shar¯ı´ah-compliant retail products to highly complex structured finance and large-scale
project implementation. These projects include the construction of power stations, water
plants, roads, bridges and other infrastructure projects.
Electronic money has also been introduced by a number of IFIs. A number of institutions,
including Kuwait Finance House, Dubai Islamic Bank, etc., are offering credit cards, while
debit cards have been issued by a large number of IFIs. National Commercial Bank of Saudi
Arabia has introduced an “advance card”, which does not have a credit line and instead has
a prepaid line. Added benefits are purchase protection, travel accident insurance without the
involvement of interest and extra fees. This prepaid card facility is especially attractive to
women, the young, the self employed and small establishment employees who sometimes
do not meet the strict requirements of a conventional credit card facility.
Some efficient and Shar¯ı´ah-compliant vehicles have been developed lately. Besides a large
number of general Islamic funds, a number of multimanager funds have been established to
ensure best practice and results without compromising on the Shar ¯ı´ah compliance matters.
A number of Islamic financial market indices have been developed that are observing
screening and purification criteria for investment in equity markets. Some examples are the
Dow Jones Islamic Index, Al-Meezan Islamic Investment Index and the Malaysian Islamic
6 For the evolution of Islamic banking and analysis of the movement, see Siddiqi, 2006a, pp. 1–48.


----- p.462 (pdf 490) -----


462 Understanding Islamic Finance
Index. A large number of corporate bodies and sovereigns have been using Sukuk in place of
interest-based securities for more than five years. The vehicle of Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant Sukuk
has been successfully introduced even in Japan and China.
International infrastructure institutions like the Islamic Development Bank, Islamic Finan-
cial Services Board (IFSB), International Islamic Financial Market (IIFM), General Council
for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions (GCIBAFI) and the International Arbitration and
Reconciliation Centre for Islamic Financial Institutions (ARCIFI), Shar ¯ı´ah support institu-
tions like the AAOIFI and Shar ¯ı´ah councils of various groups, as well as other commercial
support institutions such as the International Islamic Rating Agency (IIRA) and the Liquidity
Management Centre (LMC) are playing a crucial role in promotion and standardization of
financial operations of IFIs. Bahrain is the main centre for Islamic finance in the Middle
East region, playing a vital role in fostering Islamic banking operations and regulation. The
ARCIFI is working in Dubai as a support institution to resolve disputes that may occur
between industry participants and their counterparties.
From this perspective, the discussion on issues, potential, challenges and the way forward
for Islamic finance must take into account the factors that provide impetus and the driving
force needed for the fast promotion of the emerging Islamic finance industry. These factors
include:
1. An increasing demand for Riba-free investment instruments for religious reasons, which
has been a catalyst for the emergence of financial institutions working on Shar ¯ı´ah-
compliant bases. Riba has been prohibited in the severest terms and a conscientious Mus-
lim cannot harbour any idea about involvement in interest-based transactions. Islamic
banking has thus enabled such people to fulfil their aspirations for doing business or
investing their money without pricking their consciences.
2. The resurgence of Muslim cultural values, resulting in the desire to conduct financial
business in accordance with the Shar ¯ı´ah principles.
3. The active involvement of the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars and experts in Islamic jurisprudence
in coordination with bankers and the practitioners, which has been instrumental in
improving the availability of innovative products and increasing awareness about the
concepts and philosophy of Islamic banking.
4. The development of Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant products and instruments of investment, which
has facilitated gainful deployment of excess liquidity that IFIs had in the early years of
their establishment and broadened the base of the Islamic capital market.
5. The standardization of modes and products on a Shar ¯ı´ah basis and accounting and
auditing procedures, particularly the AAOIFI’s Shar ¯ı´ah Standards, which have played a
crucial role in enhancing credibility, and hence demand, for Islamic banks’ products. Risk
management, capital adequacy and corporate governance standards introduced/being
developed by the IFSB have also played a significant role in providing recognition for
Islamic finance.
6. The growth of surplus money in the Gulf region due to increasing petroleum prices and
the growth of economies in Muslim countries.
7. Flexibility in the regulatory framework in a number of regions, and deregulation and
privatization of financial institutions, which has also facilitated the growth of banking
and non-banking financial institutions in Islamic as well as Muslim minority countries.
For example, in the USA, more than two dozen Islamic investment institutions are
providing needed facilities to communities who avoid Riba. This began when the Glass–
Steagall Act of 1933 was repealed in 1999. Flexibility provided by the FSA in the UK


----- p.463 (pdf 491) -----


The Way Forward 463
in respect of the treatment of IFIs’ deposits, stamp duty on mortgages (which needs
only be paid once in a retail transaction) and accommodating Islamic banking practices
has given a big impetus to the Islamic finance industry in the UK and ultimately in the
whole of Europe.
8. The conversion of a few financially sound institutions in the Middle East to Islamic
modes of business in recent years on account of increasing demand, which has also
provided a self-enforcing impetus to the movement of Islamic finance.
9. The fact that, as investors are gaining awareness, high net worth individuals are shifting
their investments to Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant institutions. This is leading to the development
of Islamic finance markets and the availability of a wider range of services.
10. The real-asset-based and ethical nature of Islamic financial products based on the avoid-
ance of gambling and interest, which has increased demand for such investments and
widened the IFIs’ customer base.
In the light of the above, the way forward for the Islamic banking industry is to take
advantage of all the above factors and explore other such factors in order to provide even
more powerful impetus for its sustainable development, enabling it to contribute to the
welfare of human beings on a wider scale. In the following paragraphs we shall discuss the
potential of Islamic finance and issues and challenges that Islamic banking and finance face
in optimally realizing their potential and developing on a sustainable basis.
18.3.1 Promising Potential
The amazing development of Islamic finance in the last decade and analysis of the factors
that served as driving forces for the fast growth is indicative of the huge potential for the
industry in the future, because the factors will hopefully continue to provide impetus. An
important observation to be made in this regard is that while firm foundations of the system
have been laid down, the focus should now be on realization of the basic objectives of the
theory of Islamic finance. In other words, potential should be related to the expectations of
the pioneers of the concept of Islamic finance and the apprehensions of a large number of
contemporary scholars, who are minutely watching the procedures, direction and trends of
its growth in terms of the impact of the system in benefiting societies and removing the
anomalies created by the conventional system.
Having said that, the Islamic banking and finance industry has a large potential ahead
in retail, corporate and investment banking and fund management. The characteristic of
Islamic finance that all transactions must be based on fixed assets, services or instruments
representing such assets or services, makes investment banking, fund management, and
Sukuk issues, along with retail and corporate banking, lucrative for the financial institutions.
To realize this potential, IFIs require structural adjustments enabling them to deal with real
sector business, implementation of trading, leasing and real-estate-related contracts using
both participatory and nonparticipatory Islamic modes of financing. Structural adjustments
are necessary not only to consolidate the success achieved so far, but also to realize the huge
potential in the areas of fund management and securitization, provide Halal and relatively
better return flow to investors and thus contribute to economic growth and prosperity.


----- p.464 (pdf 492) -----


464 Understanding Islamic Finance
Potential in Fund Management
IFIs may engage in fund and portfolio management through asset management companies
regulated by the central banks or the SEC, as the case may be in various jurisdictions.
Broadly, the following may be the categories of funds:
• funds yielding return with minimum possible variation: these funds can be based on
short-term Murabaha and leasing operations of banks in both local as well as foreign
currencies and hence can be made to offer minimal risk to the investors in such funds.
Such low-risk funds, which would be earmarked for purchase of goods and their resale
on mark-up and short- to medium-term leasing operations giving fixed earnings to the
banks, would be best suited for risk-averse savers who cannot afford possible losses in
PLS-based investments.
• funds yielding high returns based on Musharakah or long-term leasing operations for
those who are willing to take some risk for higher returns.
Banks may offer a type of equity exposure through restricted/specific investment accounts,
where they may identify possible investment opportunities from existing or new business
clients and invite existing account holders to subscribe. Instead of sharing in the banks’
profit, the investors would share the profits of the project in which the funds were invested.
Banks can also offer open-ended multiple equity funds to be invested in stocks.
Banks may introduce domestic currency trade funds for those who want to invest their
savings with minimal risk. The amount thus mobilized can be invested for financing SMEs
and domestic and international trade. The experiences of Grameen Bank of Bangladesh
and the Bangladesh Islamic Bank reveal that banks may invest such funds mainly for
small- and medium-level business and trading activities wherein the default level/ratio is
expected to be the lowest. Keeping in mind the relatively larger mobility of capital across
the nations, banks may also set up international/foreign currency trade funds, which may
finance imports/exports of clients, firms and industries.
Potential Relating to Sukuk
Sukuk, a by-product of the fast-growing Islamic finance industry, have confirmed their
viability in mobilization of resources and their effective use for the benefit of both investors
and fund users. Their growth is attributable to a number of factors, including their potential
for liquidity and fund management. They could also be used as a tool for monetary policy
and open market operations and for liquidity management.
Sukuk create a framework for participation of a large number of people in financing
projects in the public and private sectors, including those of infrastructure such as roads,
bridges, ports, airports, etc., on the basis of various modes. A variety of target-specific Sukuk
can be issued, keeping in mind the relevant Shar ¯ı´ah rules. This requires appropriate enabling
laws to protect the interests of investors and issuers, appropriate accounting standards, study
of the targeted market, monitoring of standardized contracts, appropriate flow of financial
data to investors and the provision of a standard quality service to the customers at large.
The international institutions set up during the last decade to provide global acceptance
for the Islamic finance industry, namely the Bahrain-based LMC, IIFM and IIRA, have to
do a lot to make the vehicles of Sukuk, fund management and ultimately Islamic capital
markets increasingly active and efficient. They have to lead the industry players to exploit


----- p.465 (pdf 493) -----


The Way Forward 465
the potential of Shirkah-based Sukuk, because further reliance on Ijarah Sukuk alone, as
witnessed over the last five years, may not be sufficient to realize the securitization potential
of Islamic finance as a whole. 7
Potential in Specific Sectors
Asset-based modes of Islamic finance are more suitable for enhancing business and for
capital formation in priority sectors of small business, cottage industry and agriculture. If
Islamic banks and NBFIs adopt structures and procedures to suit such sectors, it could be
highly profitable for them, and beneficial for business and industrial communities and the
related economies. This is because the financing of small-and medium-sized enterprises and
micro finance have proved to be effective approaches for broad-based economic growth
and alleviating poverty in the developing and emerging economies. Islamic micro finance
institutions (IMFIs) would have fewer default, moral hazard and asymmetric information
problems. In this respect, Habib Ahmed, an economist at the IDB, has undertaken a useful
study for exploring problems and prospects of IMFIs, which readers may like to see for
details.8
Enhancing the role of the financial sector in micro-level businesses could mitigate the
serious problems of unemployment and the low level of exports in developing countries. If
suitably planned, financing of this sector could boost the development process. The value
addition generated in these industries would favourably affect the income distribution. The
post investment role of the financier, as required in Islamic modes of financing, could go
a long way towards the development of SMEs and the economy if a full-fledged structure
of financial help is provided through industry-specific and generalist models of investment.
IMFIs can also benefit from various income sources like those of Zakat and Waqf institutions
and use the resources for direct financing of needy small business enterprises, without the
involvement of any middleman, thus benefiting themselves and the clients.
For clients of high net worth and the big investors, banks may offer individual investment
portfolios and investment funds in Shirkah-based and debt-creating modes, depending upon
the risk profile of the fund owners. In such funds, banks may serve as a Mudarib or as an
agent. As Mudarib, banks would get a share in the profit on a predetermined ratio, while as
agent, they would get a fee and the rest of the profits/losses would go to the fund owners.
18.3.2 Issues in Islamic Finance
Commensurate with the prospects of growth in the Islamic finance industry are some of the
issues and challenges. Some major issues are discussed below.
Shar¯ı´ah Interpretation: An Issue?
A large number of experts and policymakers consider that different Shar ¯ı´ah interpretation
of some modes and concepts is a major issue hindering the development of Islamic finance.
Is it really an issue or merely a buzz word? This, in itself, is a question. It seems that it is
not as big an issue as some people consider; it is no longer a real problem. No doubt, in
7 Adam, 2005, pp. 371–400.
8 Ahmed, 2002, pp. 27–64.


----- p.466 (pdf 494) -----


466 Understanding Islamic Finance
the wake of emerging issues in the fast-moving world of finance, some aspects will remain
to be decided in the light of the Shar ¯ı´ah principles, and the same may be resolved as and
when confronted, but the major Shar ¯ı´ah-related issues that the Islamic finance movement
faced in the early years of its foundation have been resolved or cleared by dint of ample
work by the jurists.
The Islamic Fiqh Council of the OIC, the AAOIFI and the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars in general
have discussed at length almost all major areas and provided a number of alternatives to
most of the conventional products, except derivatives based on interest or short-selling
and speculative transactions in the Forex markets. Now the practitioners have to proceed
on the basis of the achieved consensus. Product innovation from the Shar ¯ı´ah perspective
does not mean that alternatives must be provided for each and every instrument or product
used by conventional institutions. This is not possible; a discipline based on ethics and just
hypotheses cannot afford to follow any unethical system step by step. Islamic finance will
have to observe certain restraints so that it does not become exploitative and unjust, as is
the case with its counterpart, interest-based system.
There are some unresolved issues as well, but these are not purely of Shar ¯ı´ah inter-
pretation; the practical difficulties and the ground realities have given rise to these issues.
Therefore, such problems and issues can be resolved once and for all by a body of Shar ¯ı´ah
scholars like the OIC Islamic Fiqh Council or that of the AAOIFI. And if this is not possible,
the Shar¯ı´ah boards/Shar¯ı´ah advisors of the respective banks may decide cases on merit by
resorting to Ijtihad, subject to the widely accepted principles of the Shar ¯ı´ah.
Examples of such unresolved issues are the award of liquidated damages to the banks in
cases of default on their receivables. In principle, the penalty paid by the defaulting client
goes to the charity fund; if the default persists for longer periods, it will be harmful to the
system, besides being unjust to the bank and the depositors. An accepted solution in this
regard is that banks may claim their loss through a court or any independent arbitration;
but on what firm basis the courts would be deciding is another related issue. Conventional
opportunity cost per se should not be the basis for such award. Some Shar ¯ı´ah boards allow
the banks to charge defaulters a rate based on the income that they have earned from the
similar portfolio in the related period. But the deciding factor should be the financial position
and the behaviour of the client and the expenses and time involved in litigation, on the basis
of which the court may allow some or the whole of the penalty to go to the bank.
Another practice-related issue could be that of the liability of the banks’ shareholders
towards investment account holders of Islamic banks. This is a complicated issue because
it also involves conflict of interests; its solution lies in a firm regulatory framework with
special emphasis on safeguarding the interests of the depositors. Losses to banks could
be due to overexposure, lack of diversification, imprudent banking practices and/or actual
business losses. The Shar ¯ı´ah boards of the banks may decide the cases on merit, keeping
in mind all such factors.
As regards the big issues of Shar ¯ı´ah interpretation, it is encouraging to observe that,
lately, the practitioners in the Far East have started using genuine alternatives to interest
(like Ijarah) for issuance of Sukuk, and it could be anticipated that in future, they will also
change the basis of products based on the sale of debt and buy-back. Going forward, the
focus of policymakers and product developers should be on development of the products,
instruments and the Islamic finance industry by using the flexibilities already available and
not wasting time and money on such areas that could lead only to the loss of integrity of
the emerging discipline of finance. They should stick to the standards issued by the AAOIFI


----- p.467 (pdf 495) -----


The Way Forward 467
that are based on the deep conceptual research by Shar ¯ı´ah scholars under the aegis of the
Fiqh Academy of the OIC. This is the only way to avoid inconsistencies in interpretation of
Shar¯ı´ah law by different scholars.
Integrity and Credibility
The integrity of IFIs has unfortunately become an issue; a large number of people, inten-
tionally or inadvertently, express doubts, not only about the credibility of the system but
also about the intention and integrity of the scholars and the practitioners involved in the
process of evolution. This has to be tackled with joint efforts by the Islamic banks, the cen-
tral banks/regulators and the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars if rapid growth of the emerging discipline of
finance is the objective. Many academicians, policymakers, regulators, religious leaders and
even those who are working with Islamic banks are not confident about the Shar ¯ı´ah position
of Islamic banks’ products. The integrity of Islamic financial institutions depends on:
1. The status of Shar ¯ı´ah compliance of their products.
2. The impact of the products on the clients and the society or economy.
3. Professional competence and care for the interests of the stakeholders.
4. Behaviour towards and observance of Shar ¯ı´ah norms by IFIs’ incumbents.
As regards the first factor, Shar ¯ı´ah scholars may play a crucial role in enhancing the
credibility of IFIs. People with Shar ¯ı´ah considerations normally approach the Shar ¯ı´ah
scholars to get advice for investment in Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant avenues. But the problem is
that many religious leaders do not fully understand the operations of IFIs. Hence, they give
edicts prohibiting people to invest in any institution called a “bank”. To them, a bank cannot
work on Islamic principles and any amount received or paid over and above the amounts
deposited or taken from the banks is Riba, irrespective of the nature of banks’ operations.
It is pertinent, therefore, that an association of IFIs in different countries or the central
banks should launch programmes for awareness and education of such religious leaders,
not only about the functions of banking and other intermediary institutions but also about
the principles and philosophy underlying Islamic banking operations. At the very least, the
Shar¯ı´ah Standards developed by the AAOIFI must be introduced to them in detail. This
would enhance their confidence and enable them to create a positive impression of Islamic
banking among the common people.
Factor 2 above is very important in enhancing the credibility of Islamic banking. People
generally question the impact of present Islamic banking practices vis-à-vis the impact of
the conventional banks’ operations. Normally, Islamic bankers fail to defend themselves
on this point because they do not have in mind such ideas; like conventional bankers,
they are simply told how to earn profit. They must be given sound and intensive training
about the philosophy and functioning of IFIs and the differences between the services of
Islamic banks and those of their counterparts, and about how and to what extent Islamic
banking practices could be useful for society. However, a pertinent point in this regard is
that policymakers, product developers and those who are at the helm of affairs must bear in
mind socio-economic considerations along with the profit consideration.
Further, Islamic bankers and the public in general must be apprised of the role various
modes of financing can play in socio-economic development. The stakeholders should also
have knowledge of the limitations and challenges facing Islamic banking, due to which it
might not be able to achieve the results proclaimed in Islamic finance theory, at least in the
short or medium terms.


----- p.468 (pdf 496) -----


468 Understanding Islamic Finance
The stakeholders must have the knowledge that all Islamic modes have potential for
development. Shirkah-based (PLS) modes that provide the much-needed risk-related funds
for development of trade, business and industry can be used for short-, medium- and long-
term project financing, import financing, preshipment export financing, working capital
financing and financing of most single transactions. The institution of Mudarabah serves
as a basis of business to be conducted by combining funds and the expertise of different
groups of people. Mudarabah Sukuk can be issued to mobilize funds and strengthen trading
and industrial activities. SPVs can manage such assets and conduct business for their benefit
and that of the Sukuk holders. This could generate higher rates of return for the investors
relative to the return realizable on any interest-based investment, as discussed in Chapter 12.
In the case of big projects, IFIs may form consortia to issue certificates to the public
for subscription. Similarly, they can carry out work on infrastructure and socio-economic
projects in coordination and partnership with engineering firms.
The non-PLS techniques not only complement the PLS modes but also provide flexibility
of choice to meet the needs of different sectors and economic agents in society. Murabaha,
with less risk, has several advantages vis-à-vis other techniques and can be helpful in
meeting the needs of risk-averse investors, employment generation and alleviation of poverty.
Leasing is very much conducive to the formation of fixed assets and medium- and long-term
investments. Salam has a large potential in financing productive activities in crucial sectors,
particularly agriculture, agro-based industries and the rural economy as a whole. To realize
this potential, IFIs could organize a forward commodity trade market on the basis of Salam.
This would provide not only a nonspeculative forward market for resource mobilization and
investment, but would also be a powerful vehicle for rural development.
On the basis of the above, it can be said that supply of and demand for investment capital
would continue in an interest-free scenario with the additional benefit of a larger supply of
risk-related capital, more efficient allocation of resources and an active role of banks and
financial institutions, as required in the asset-based Islamic discipline of finance. This could
be helpful in achieving the objective of development with distributive justice by increasing
the supply of risk capital in the economy, facilitating capital formation and growth of fixed
assets and real sector business activities.
But a point of concern in this regard is that Islamic banks are obliged to work with a
number of limitations and constraints, most important among which is competition with the
mainstream banks. They have to use the same benchmarks and apply charges comparable
with the main conventional market. As such, it may take more effort and relatively a much
longer time to achieve visible socio-economic results.
As regards points 3 and 4 above, the moral dimension is the main ingredient of Islamic
banking and finance. IFIs may implement a code of conduct reflecting Islamic values and
principles, strictly ensuring that it is demonstrated in the management procedures, operations
and overall behaviour of their incumbents (see the AAOIFI’s Code of Ethics ). This is
particularly relevant in Muslim majority areas, where Islamic culture has a deep bearing on
the approaches and ideas of the masses. Islamic banking is one aspect of an Islamic way of
life and if an Islamic banker is involved in any unethical or prohibited practices, it could
undermine the integrity and credibility of the system. Therefore, ensuring good governance
by IFIs on the basis of Islamic behavioural principles and moral and business ethics is a big
challenge for the integrity and long-term health of IFIs.
The ultimate objective in this regard should be to provide the best services at competitive
rates and to strike a balance between the interests of the shareholders and those of the


----- p.469 (pdf 497) -----


The Way Forward 469
depositors. It has been observed that to compete with conventional financial institutions, some
IFIs have been giving fixed rates of return, either by paying from the shareholders’ part or by
allocating more to the shareholders in the case of higher profits. Although profit equalization
reserves can be maintained with sufficient disclosure and transparency, apportioning profits
just to compete in the market and without taking the partners into confidence is against the
spirit of the Shar ¯ı´ah. An effective enforcement of the code of conduct would enhance the
integrity of the system.
Structure of Financial Institutions
What the structure of Islamic banks should be is another issue. Should they become traders
or business entities? In most countries, they have to operate analogously to the conventional
banks, within the national banking systems in general and in respect of international financial
and business transactions in particular. Although the philosophy, process and the procedures
of Islamic banks differ, they do serve as financial intermediaries and as a link in the chain
of the banking system. Like conventional banks, they mobilize savings and undertake the
financing of economic and social development activities for the benefit of the economies
where they operate. While fulfilling this objective, which is indisputably accepted by all
Islamic scholars, they have to undertake real sector business instead of dealing in money on
the basis of interest. This implies that Islamic banks’ procedures should be different from
those of the conventional banks, in the sense that the latter deal in money while Islamic
banks have to deal in goods. Islamic banks’ modus operandi is also different from that of the
business community in general, because they do not normally hold inventories of the goods
for selling or leasing. They rather purchase the goods/assets on requisition of their clients
for letting or onward sale, and there is no Shar ¯ı´ah objection in this regard. Accordingly, the
Murabaha Standard issued by the AAOIFI has been captioned the Standard for Murabaha
to Purchase Orderer.
Concern has been shown by a number of writers that IFIs concentrate on short-term
commercial financing, like the conventional banks. An active developmental role is expected
of them that actually provides the rationale for their existence. The concern is genuine, but
to combat it would require some structural changes and amendments in legal and regulatory
frameworks, which are crucial for ensuring Shar ¯ı´ah compliance and for better performance
of the IFIs.
Accordingly, banking business should not be taken as a sacred cow to preclude any change
in its tools, processes or operations. Survival in the world of finance, which is undergoing
rapid transformation, is possible only through adjustments and transformation, needed from
time to time due to changing ground realities. In the global competitive environment, IFIs
must diversify their operations to offer broader portfolio services, both to savers/investors
and fund users. By providing only short-term commercial loans, they cannot compete with
giant conventional banks. They should increasingly provide project and infrastructure financ-
ing through Shirkah- and Ijarah-based modes. They may also provide corporate advisory
services like issuance of Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant Sukuk/certificates and balance sheet and corpo-
rate restructuring, etc. through syndication arrangements. IFIs also have to undertake all sorts
of business – from retail banking to fund management and corporate services – by effecting
some structural changes. This would require close coordination between central banks and
SECs in respective countries, enabling the IFIs to adopt suitable models and structures for
business, keeping in mind the demands of the market and the Shar ¯ı´ah principles.


----- p.470 (pdf 498) -----


470 Understanding Islamic Finance
IFIs might engage in portfolio management through a number of asset management,
leasing and trading companies. Subsidiaries can be created for specific sectors/operations,
which would enter into genuine trade and leasing transactions.
Regulatory and Tax Issues
Another pertinent issue is the regulatory framework for Islamic financial institutions. Like
the conventional institutions, IFIs, too, require regulation for the following reasons:
1. Making the needed information available to the investors.
2. Protecting the interests of savers.
3. Ensuring Shar ¯ı´ah compliance and soundness of the financial system.
4. Making the legal framework conducive to the smooth functioning of the system in which
“cost of funds” cannot be recovered in the case of default.
5. Making the monetary policy and management effective.
The policy, nature and the level of regulation and supervision and the legal frameworks
have important bearing on the size, growth, Shar¯ı´ah compliance and integrity of the Shar¯ı´ah-
based finance discipline. As the nature of their operations is different, IFIs have to face
different problems in respect of legal, regulatory and taxation rules. In order to foster stability
in Islamic banking, there is a need to develop uniform regulatory and transparency standards
that are tailored to the specific characteristics of Islamic financial products and institutions.
This task, whilst taking into consideration the financial environment in each country, would
also need adaptation of the international standards, core principles and good practices to the
specific needs of Islamic finance. Islamic banks have to purchase assets for onward sale
or lease to their clients. As such, the levy of taxation and fees on their purchases leads to
an uneven playing field for them compared with their conventional counterparts. To avoid
such costs, Islamic banks, except for a few countries with a tax-free environment, resort to
practices creating doubts with respect to Shar ¯ı´ah compliance when seen in standards set by
the AAOIFI and the Islamic Fiqh Council of the OIC.
The regulators in countries where both systems operate side by side should recognize
the need to set up flexible regulatory and tax frameworks that could facilitate banking
operations in line with the Shar ¯ı´ah principles. Flexibilities granted by the FSA in Britain are
a welcome move; it is hoped that the process of adaptation of laws will continue in order to
make London an international hub for the Islamic finance industry in coming years. 9 Other
regulators are also required to amend rules and regulations to facilitate Islamic banking
transactions with proper risk management and Shar ¯ı´ah compliance. For a comprehensive
framework, the following steps would be needed:
1. Saving the IFIs and their customers from dual taxation, particularly in respect of mort-
gage financing and Murabaha and leasing operations.
2. Facilitating the IFIs to fulfil all Shar ¯ı´ah-related requirements on the deposits and assets
sides.
3. Providing an effective Shar ¯ı´ah compliance framework.
4. Ensuring that banks adopt justifiable procedures for distribution of profits between the
shareholders and the depositors, and then among various categories of depositors. This
is more relevant in the Islamic financial system than in the conventional system.
9 For changes made or required to be made in the UK taxation laws, see the article by Mohammed Amin (Amin, 2006).


----- p.471 (pdf 499) -----


The Way Forward 471
5. Increasing the amount of information available to the investors to reduce the adverse
selection and moral hazard problems in financial markets.
6. Enforcing prudential rules and regulations, keeping in mind proper risk management
and the needs and nature of the new system.
7. Ensuring that the risks relating to current accounts, which are a liability for the IFIs, are
borne by the banks themselves and not transmitted to investment accounts, particularly
when the bank is in distress.
8. Vigorous training of concerned central bank staff, enabling them to effectively supervise
and guide the IFIs.
9. Establishment of a research and training centre for banking regulations, supervision and
education.
10. Rating institutions and feasibility study institutions with specially trained incumbents
are the infrastructure of the new system that should be provided.
Protecting the rights of the depositors is said to be the foremost important objective of
regulators all over the world, as per their vision and mission statements. However, practically,
the situation is the reverse. Working in the “capitalist” structure, the regulators/central banks
in almost all economies where the financial sector has been “liberalized” do not intervene in
the rate structures of financial services, while actually they need more intensive supervision
in order to protect the depositors and entrepreneurs from possible exploitation by financial
institutions working with the motto of “self-interest” and maximization of their net profits.
The free market policy has become a source of injustice and exploitation of the clients both of
conventional and Islamic banks. As banks’ income increases, they should pass on a fair part
of their income to the depositors. Practically, however, only the spread has been increasing.
There is a need for proper vigilance by the regulators, particularly for IFIs, because their
depositors have to bear additional risks.
Keeping in mind the possibilities of business failure, some customers of IFIs may not be
able to pay their liabilities in time. Shar ¯ı´ah scholars have allowed the receipt of additional
amounts for charity in order to discipline customers. But the IFIs must differentiate between
the wilful defaulters and those who are really in trouble. For this purpose, the regulators
may introduce some parameters to ensure that while solvent/wilful defaulters are charged
heavily to create a deterrent for others, those who are in genuine difficulties and unable to
pay their liabilities are given respite without any charge or fine. A well-thought-out system
for restructuring the liabilities of such insolvent customers and for helping them in revival
of their business has to be an important part of the regulatory set-up for Islamic finance.
For an effective Shar ¯ı´ah compliance mechanism, regulators may enlist Shar ¯ı´ah advisors
with the appropriate entry qualifications and skill sets. If necessary, central banks may like
to help train Shar ¯ı´ah scholars to improve their understanding of finance and skills for
enhancing their practice-oriented knowledge.
Regulations are also needed for transparent and proper disposal of charity amounts from
the Islamic banks, keeping in mind the principles of charity in the Shar ¯ı´ah. In addition to
general heads to dispense charity funds, rules can be provided on the basis of nonremunerative
(e.g. current accounts) deposits and the level of net earnings of the IFIs, in terms of which
some funds might be used for grants or return-free loans to the poor and the needy, like
students belonging to low-income groups, widows, the sick and other destitute members
of society. For this purpose, IFIs can also be required to contribute from the shareholders’
income. Regulators may ensure that Islamic banks do not spend lavishly on unnecessary


----- p.472 (pdf 500) -----


472 Understanding Islamic Finance
marketing; instead, they should use the community and social development avenues for
marketing their products.
Shar¯ı´ah Compliance Framework
The need for Shar ¯ı´ah compliance of IFIs’ operations is accepted by all, but what the
framework should be in different situations is an issue that needs to be resolved. One option
is to have Shar ¯ı´ah boards in all Islamic financial institutions that could guide in product
development and application and also enforce internal Shar ¯ı´ah controls at a micro-level.
The problem with this option is that having a Shar ¯ı´ah board in all individual IFIs would not
be feasible due to the shortage of competent Shar ¯ı´ah scholars, and also the sheer cost. A
small variation in this option could be to have one Shar ¯ı´ah advisor, and not a board, in every
IFI. Along with this, the central bank or an association of IFIs may facilitate the formation
of a forum of Shar ¯ı´ah advisors for all IFIs in a country to periodically meet for discussion
and resolution of Shar ¯ı´ah-related issues. This could serve the dual purpose of economizing
on costs and providing an opportunity for wider level discussion on Shar ¯ı´ah-related issues.
It may also lead to standardization of edicts on the transactions of IFIs.
The other option is that the central banks or monetary authorities may facilitate the
establishment of independent Shar¯ı´ah boards/committees in the private sector, with members
having Shar¯ı´ah as well as banking knowledge, that could provide advisory and consultancy
services in respect of all aspects relating to development and implementation of products
and periodical Shar ¯ı´ah-related inspection of IFIs. For the integrity and competence of
such private sector boards, central bank accreditation based upon fit and proper and good
governance criteria would be necessary. In this structure, Shar ¯ı´ah boards or Shar¯ı´ah scholars
would not be necessary in the central bank or the individual IFIs. But the dark side of this
option is that effective monitoring of the operations and guidance and advice on Shar ¯ı´ah
matters needed from time to time by the bankers would not be possible.
Another option is that there should be a central Shar ¯ı´ah board in a country or jurisdiction
to advise the regulators on Shar ¯ı´ah issues and facilitate the IFIs in ensuring Shar ¯ı´ah
compliance in coordination with Shar ¯ı´ah advisors/boards of the individual banks. This
option could be instrumental in bringing harmony in the practices of IFIs working in a
jurisdiction. This seems to be the best option and could be made more useful if a forum of
Shar¯ı´ah advisors, as proposed above, was also added to the scheme.
A related issue is the constitution of the Shar ¯ı´ah board: should all members be Shar ¯ı´ah
scholars or it should comprise Shar¯ı´ah scholars as well as other experts from other disciplines
like banking, accountancy, law, economics and others? Most Shar ¯ı´ah boards comprise only
Shar¯ı´ah scholars with understanding of banking and finance. Experts from other disciplines
are co-opted for technical help as and when required. Edicts are issued mostly on the basis
of unanimous decisions by the members of the boards. Sometimes, consensus is attained
on the basis of majority and this happens mostly in cases where Shar ¯ı´ah endorsement is
outsourced. It is interesting to observe that Shar ¯ı´ah endorsement of most of the Sukuk issues
by an international Islamic financial institution in the recent past has been on the majority
principle. The majority principle could be adopted in some cases if sufficient grounds on
the basis of accepted Shar ¯ı´ah principles are available. But open and frequent resort to this
principle in Shar ¯ı´ah matters may harm the integrity of the board and/or the system in the
long run. One possible solution to avoid differences is that the AAOIFI Standards should be
made the basis of the Shar ¯ı´ah boards’ decisions/edicts and applied meticulously.


----- p.473 (pdf 501) -----


The Way Forward 473
Whichever option is taken, ensuring Shar ¯ı´ah compliance requires much more input by
the banks themselves and the regulators. This refers to the need for full-fledged Shar ¯ı´ah
departments in all IFIs, effective internal Shar ¯ı´ah controls and Shar¯ı´ah inspection of Islamic
banks’ operations. The banks operating “Islamic windows” may be required to establish
stand-alone Islamic banking branches in place of “windows” to conduct business under the
guidance of Shar ¯ı´ah monitoring.
Another important aspect is that Shar ¯ı´ah boards/advisors should supervise, not only
advise, the activities of Islamic banks in order to ensure Shar ¯ı´ah compliance in all respects.
To this end, they should finalize the model agreements and application procedures for the
modes of financing and try to ensure that banks follow them in all their transactions, in
letter and spirit. A passive role, whereby they are limited to approving the products or
procedures and the applications are left totally to the banks, opens the door to interest in the
garb of asset-based transactions. The modus operandi adopted in many cases lacks Shar ¯ı´ah
inspiration and a slight change or negligence in any of the formalities may render the
transactions non-Shar¯ı´ah-compliant. Therefore, the experts deem it necessary that Shar ¯ı´ah
boards should thoroughly inspect, at least once a year, the Islamic banks’ activities.
For Shar¯ı´ah-related inspection of operations of the IFIs, the following three options have
been suggested, with the scale of preference in ascending order: 10
1. Shar ¯ı´ah-related inspection by central banks themselves.
2. Inspection by specially created Shar ¯ı´ah audit firms working in the private sector.
3. Inspection by external CA and audit firms.
But this order of preference might be different in different jurisdictions. In countries where
the central bank’s inspection team is competent, professionally trained and well-equipped,
the first option might be the best. All depends on the expertise and integrity of the auditors
and the audit firms. The regulators may decide on merit, with the ultimate objective of
effectively checking that the IFIs do not undertake non-Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant practices.
Box 18.1: Shar¯ı´ah Compliance Framework Introduced by the State
Bank of Pakistan
• A Shar ¯ı´ah board comprising two Shar ¯ı´ah scholars and three experts in the areas of
banking, accounting and the legal framework was established in the central bank in
December, 2003. The board advises the central bank on modes, procedures, laws and
regulation for Islamic banking to ensure Islamic banks’ functioning in line with the
Shar¯ı´ah principles.
• A Shar ¯ı´ah board or at least a Shar ¯ı´ah advisor has to be appointed by each Islamic
banking institution (IBI) as per fit and proper criteria approved by SBP’s Shar ¯ı´ah
board.
• Each IBI has to conduct internal Shar ¯ı´ah audit at least once in a year.
10 Chapra and Khan, 2000.


----- p.474 (pdf 502) -----


474 Understanding Islamic Finance
Box 18.1: (Continued)
• The State Bank of Pakistan has provided for Shar¯ı´ah compliance audit by its inspection
staff for IBIs to ensure Shar ¯ı´ah compliance and enhance the credibility of the Islamic
banking system. A manual for Shar ¯ı´ah audit has been prepared in consultation with
a consultancy firm of repute. For capacity building, the first Shar ¯ı´ah audit of an
Islamic bank was outsourced to the same firm to develop Shar ¯ı´ah audit skills and
provide hands-on training to the State Bank’s inspection staff. The inspection manual
has been finalized, keeping in mind the experience gained and observations made by
the auditors during that inspection. Periodical Shar ¯ı´ah-compliance inspection of IBIs
has to be conducted by auditors of the State Bank on the basis of that manual.
One problem related to Shar ¯ı´ah audit is how to resolve any possible difference of opinion
between the Shar ¯ı´ah department of a bank and the Shar ¯ı´ah auditors. The best solution to
this problem is that in each jurisdiction a Shar ¯ı´ah manual should be prepared with joint
efforts of the auditors/regulators, different Shar ¯ı´ah boards and the practitioners and the audit
should then be conducted on the basis of that manual.
The next question would be how to penalize IFIs if any lapses are proved in the Shar ¯ı´ah
audit. On the assets side, the solution lies in allocating the revenue from non-Shar ¯ı´ah-
compliant transactions to the Charity Account. But this loss should belong to the shareholders
and not the depositors, because they furnish deposits for Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant business and if
the bank fails to accomplish this, it must be penalized; the depositors should not be penalized
for follies of the bank’s management. For irregularities on the deposits side, the regulators
will have to enforce a set of penalties in consultation with the auditors and the Shar ¯ı´ah
scholars.
18.3.3 The Challenges
An inspiring performance so far and the huge potential ahead, combined with the resolution
of issues which could boost the growth momentum of the Islamic finance industry, gives
rise to a number of challenges. The future relies on the policymakers and the practitioners
and how they face the challenges. The major challenges are briefly discussed below.
Education and Awareness Creation
The pace of growth in the future certainly depends on enhancing the clientele of the emerging
industry, which is possible only through education of the people, removing the myths and
creating awareness about the new system. The economists, policymakers and the general
public, both in Muslim majority and Muslim minority countries, have a number of queries
about Islamic finance, like: How does it work? Can it survive on a sustainable basis in
competition with a centuries old financial system? Are the products offered by it really
Islamic? Could it make any difference in removing the hardships of mankind? And so on
and so forth. Bankers have to respond to all these queries with confidence. Similarly, the
savers/investors who have so far avoided the banking channel per se due to the involvement


----- p.475 (pdf 503) -----


The Way Forward 475
of Riba will approach Islamic banks only when they are assured that their funds will be
invested in Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant activities.
There is a lot of criticism that the concept of Islamic banking and finance has changed
visibly from the concept envisaged in the 1970s. People need to be told in this regard that
the practice is evolving from the philosophy, which has not changed – the subject matter
for the banks has to be goods and services, not money per se and all financial transactions
have to be linked to real sector transactions based on well-defined business rules. It depends
on the nature of the transaction. If a transaction is one of trade or Ijarah, the price or rental
has to be fixed. Further, despite the apparent divergence, Shar ¯ı´ah compliance is ensured in
respect of all modes and Islamic finance is passing through the initial process of evolution.
Hence, creating understanding of the Shar ¯ı´ah principles and enhancing knowledge about
Islamic modes of business and investment, both among Muslims and non-Muslims, is the
greatest challenge. Efforts need to be made without further delay to create demand and
appeal on the basis of principles and philosophy of the new discipline of finance. Failure
in creating requisite awareness could inevitably lead to serious disruptions in the market,
causing systemic risk for the nascent industry. Through a comprehensive campaign, people
must be made to understand that Islamic banking does not mean free loaning to business
and industry, and that savers can justifiably take a return on the basis of the nature of the
transactions and results of the business activity undertaken with the help of their funds.
Creating awareness about these aspects is more necessary among the religious leaders at
grass-roots level.
The clients also need to be apprised that Islamic banks use the funds with professional
competence and a sense of responsibility only in permissible avenues and that prohibited
and indecent activities are avoided.
Shar¯ı´ah Compliance and the Integrity of the Islamic Finance Industry
Shar¯ı´ah compliance of business and transactions is of crucial importance for ensuring the
integrity and credibility of the Islamic banking industry. Therefore, Islamic bankers will have
to ensure that whatever they are offering is in conformity with the tenets of the Shar ¯ı´ah, and
for this purpose they must keep in mind that all human beings are individually answerable
to Allah (SWT). The last revealed verse of the Holy Qur’ ¯an (2: 281), placed next to the
verses of Surah al Baqarah on Riba, clearly describes this principle of accountability. But
practically, many IFIs, particularly those who are operating windows without any effective
internal Shar¯ı´ah-related controls, are using products like Tawarruq, buy-back arrangements
and other grey area instruments so bluntly that if not checked forthwith, they may betray the
whole movement. This is why M. Nejatullah Siddiqi, one of the pioneers of Islamic finance,
suggests in one of his recent papers:
“This leads us to the need for a redefinition of the term ‘Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant’. It should not be
confined to analogical reasoning and matching new with old, approved contracts. Considerations
of Maslaha and Maqasid al Shar ¯ı´ah should be an essential part of the comprehensive definition.
Shar¯ı´ah advisors educated in traditional Islamic sciences only can hardly do so, as it requires a
grasp of economic analysis /periodmtmi/periodmtmi/periodmtmi. A strong involvement of trained economists and social scientists is
necessary.”11
11 Siddiqi, 2006, p. 17; also see Parker, 1999.


----- p.476 (pdf 504) -----


476 Understanding Islamic Finance
For achieving the objective of Shar ¯ı´ah compliance, the active involvement of people
having deep understanding of Shar ¯ı´ah matters, socio-economic issues and principles of
finance is crucial. Credibility has to be established, both at national and international levels.
For this purpose, the involvement of IFIs in real sector business is necessary, failing which
they cannot escape severe criticism. Moreover, this will have no socio-economic impact,
even if implemented across the whole world. Presently, the common man understands that
Islamic banks do not actually carry out businesses like trading, leasing or construction
activities and hence they end up doing only financial operations. This impression needs to
be removed.
Shar¯ı´ah compliance requires Shar ¯ı´ah inspiration and complete observance of the prin-
ciples of Islamic finance. It also needs internal controls and Shar ¯ı´ah-related inspection for
enhancing credibility and acceptability of the IFIs. It does not mean, however, that other
professional requirements for successful business are of less importance. Phillip Moore, in
Islamic Finance: A Partnership for Growth (1997), contends that a Shar ¯ı´ah board will
typically ask four questions in relation to any given transaction. These will generally be:
1. Do the terms of the transaction comply with Shar ¯ı´ah law?
2. Is this the best investment for the client?
3. Does the investment produce value for the client and for the community or society in
which the client is active?
4. As an asset manager, is this a transaction in which the banker as an individual would be
prepared to invest his own money?
If the answer to any of these four questions is no, the proposed transaction would usually
be rejected, although the committees only have the power to reject the transaction on the
grounds that it does not comply with Shar ¯ı´ah law. This author agrees with Moore and
reiterates that Shar ¯ı´ah compliance must be accompanied by the best solutions for the
financial problems of the clients.
Competitiveness and Parallel Functioning
The most dominant and common model of Islamic banking in practice today comprises a
dual system, whereby interest-based and Islamic financial institutions are working side by
side. While the growth of the Islamic financial system is a challenge to the conventional
interest-based banks, the adoption of Islamic financial modes by the conventional banks
is a challenge to the Islamic banks. This situation, on the one hand, points to increasing
competition in future, and on the other hand, calls for the development of cooperation
between the two types of institutions.
In the present scenario, wherein the share of IFIs in the national as well as global
financial systems is low, functioning of the Islamic financial institutions in the competitive
environment is really a challenge. They cannot give rates to the depositors significantly
different from the conventional benchmark rates because of regulatory requirements and
the forces of demand and supply in the competitive markets. While conventional banks
can market their liability side products by offering fixed rates of return, Islamic banks
cannot do so unless they compromise on the Shar ¯ı´ah principles. This makes it much more
difficult for them to get deposits from the corporate sector where the main concern of the
financial managers is the highest return without any risk. The same is true on the financing
side, as competing with the conventional institutions while ensuring Shar ¯ı´ah compliance is


----- p.477 (pdf 505) -----


The Way Forward 477
very difficult for IFIs unless they change their strategy and structure. In order to meet this
challenge, IFIs have to make efforts in coordination with the regulators, Shar ¯ı´ah scholars
and the customers. Prospering in the competitive environment on a sustainable basis would
require;
• conformity of products and transactions with the Shar ¯ı´ah principles;
• best practice strategy for screening Islamic investments along with taking care of credit,
market and other operational risks;
• innovative products;
• better quality of service to the customers.
In a highly competitive environment, IFIs would require some structural adjustments
enabling them to deal with real sector business, implementation of trading, leasing and real-
estate related contracts using both profit/loss sharing (PLS) and “fixed-rate” Islamic modes
of financing. For example, banking laws and regulations in many jurisdictions require that
deposits be treated as capital guaranteed, while Shar ¯ı´ah requires that the same should be
based on profit/loss sharing. This problem could be resolved if IFIs operate in the form of
mutual funds. Such an approach would enable them to earn higher profits, as businesses
in the real sector normally earn, and pass on a greater part of the profits so earned to the
savers/investors.
Developing Benchmarks
Islamic financial institutions require benchmarks for pricing of goods and services and
for determining sharing ratios for distribution of profit among partners of joint ventures.
Such benchmarks will be different in different jurisdictions and sectors/subsectors and will
require deep study, keeping in mind the level of development, the supply and demand of
goods and services and also the assets and liabilities of the customers. Such studies need
to be undertaken at international as well as country levels. One such effort was made by
Abbas Mirakhor and Nadeem ul Haque in 1998, focusing on developing some indices for
calculating rates of return on national participation papers (NPP). 12
For the time being, conventional benchmarks are being used by IFIs in almost all juris-
dictions. Although permissible from a Shar ¯ı´ah point of view as a tool and basis for pricing
of goods and their usufructs, a benchmark reflective of fictitious assets, as is the case in the
conventional framework, will not be helpful in realizing the socio-economic objectives of
Islamic banking and finance. This will require long-term and sustained efforts on the part of
the economists, bankers, policymakers and the Shar ¯ı´ah scholars.
Product Development – Financial Engineering
The need for innovative products for cash management and financing of various sectors,
particularly the government or public sector, cannot be overemphasized. It requires mutual
efforts by the economists, practitioners, Shar ¯ı´ah scholars and the regulators. The major
challenge in product innovation and designing the investment products is ensuring Shar ¯ı´ah
compliance in line with the mainstream theory developed so far. Any resort to Shar ¯ı´ah
12 Mirakhor and ul Haque, 1998.


----- p.478 (pdf 506) -----


478 Understanding Islamic Finance
interpretation unacceptable to the majority of the scholars would damage the image of the
emerging industry in the long run.
In the area of public finance, a lot of work needs to be done by the product developers
in collaboration with the fiscal authorities in various jurisdictions. The potential of Sukuk
and securitization can help a lot in meeting this challenge. In case of dire need, the Shar ¯ı´ah
boards may like to offer well-defined and specified relaxations without compromising on the
cardinal principles of the Shar ¯ı´ah. Any vague observations or edicts may lead to anarchy
and loss of integrity for Islamic finance theory and themselves.
Liquidity and Monetary Management
Monetary management in the framework of Islamic finance is the area where sufficient work
has not been done so far. A related matter is the availability of instruments for liquidity
management. As compared with conventional institutions, IFIs have to place a greater part
of their deposits with the central banks, on which they get no return in lieu of the statutory
liquidity reserves (SLR). This harms their competitiveness in terms of giving competitive
returns to the depositors. While some instruments for liquidity management have been
developed and introduced, the modus operandi of their use for OMOs and repo has to be
evolved.
The establishment of inter-bank Islamic money markets in each jurisdiction with a signif-
icant number of IFIs is a key element for short-term liquidity management and for monetary
management and ultimately for the promotion of Islamic finance. Any mismatch between
clients’ demand for funds and their supply is normally covered through inter-bank transac-
tions, which can be conducted on the Mudarabah principle. Islamic banks can also invest
their funds with conventional banks offering Islamic banking business, provided the latter
invest them on a Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant basis ensuring segregation of Riba-free and Riba-based
deposits and financing. The latter will also have to ensure that any Shar¯ı´ah advisor/committee
has certified such segregation.
The banks may also resort to securitization of their assets or fund management by issuing
certificates of deposit or investment. The certificates of the funds may be traded in the
secondary market. It is, however, necessary that the cash and receivables component in the
pool of assets being securitized or the assets of the funds should be less than 50 %. Since
the certificates will belong to funds that are based on genuine asset-based transactions, they
will have a genuine secondary market.
The central bank as the lender of last resort is the most strategic part of the conventional
financial system. The following could be the options in this regard in the Islamic framework:
1. A Mudarabah-based facility in case of a liquidity crisis of defined extent faced by any
IFI. This could be for two or three days with a profit-sharing ratio of, say, 50:50 on the
basis of the daily product; it can be provided in the Mudarabah agreement that if the
IFI is unable to pay back the amount on the due date, the profit-sharing ratio will be
enhanced in favour of the central bank.
2. The establishment of a common pool with the central bank to which all IFIs may contribute
at a specified percentage of their deposits and from which they will have the right to get
interest-free accommodation up to (three) days in the case of a defined liquidity crunch.


----- p.479 (pdf 507) -----


The Way Forward 479
Supply of Well-versed Human Resources
One of the major bottlenecks for the development of the Islamic financial industry at this
stage is the scarcity of trained human resources. Although IFIs are also intermediaries,
like conventional banks, the mindset of Islamic bankers has to be significantly different
and requires special orientation. All incumbents of IFIs should not only be technically
competent but also well aware of Islamic finance principles and committed to their cause.
Only committed and competent personnel, embedded with Islamic ethical values, can be
instrumental in marketing the products in Muslim and other communities and enhancing the
acceptability of the new discipline. This challenge can be met by imparting quality training
to all those who are related in one way or another to Islamic financial institutions about the
philosophy, products and practices of Islamic finance.
The long-term growth of Islamic finance will require developing a framework for HR
development, pushing up R & D activities and enhancing training and education facilities in
collaboration with the leading academic and research institutions. It will require joint efforts
by the Islamic financial institutions, Shar ¯ı´ah scholars, central banks/regulators, universities,
business schools and the student community. The universities should sense the huge need
for providing competent human resources to the Islamic finance industry. In this context, the
focus has to be on the philosophy of Islamic finance as it has evolved today and the practical
operations of Islamic financial institutions, without getting involved in any unnecessary
controversies.
18.4 CONCLUSION
The prospects for Islamic banking and finance are bright but the task ahead is challenging. Its
practice is not only sustainable but also profitable in taking the form of a genuine business.
However, there is a need for change in the procedures and the tools of business and the mind-
set of the stakeholders, and also for coordinated work in order to develop innovative products
while remaining within the Shar ¯ı´ah boundaries. This will require promoting collaboration at
various levels, including global and local, public and private sectors, business/industry and
academia, Shar ¯ı´ah scholars and practitioners. Support from governments and regulators is
crucial. They may accommodate Islamic finance for reasons both of principles and practical
importance.
Realization of the potential of Islamic finance will require structural adjustments enabling
Islamic financial institutions to deal with real sector business, implementation of trading,
leasing and real-estate related contracts using Islamic modes of financing. Fixity of rates is
no problem at all; nonfixity of prices and rentals rather makes the transactions invalid as
per the Shar ¯ı´ah rules. The mindset for conducting trading, leasing or other such businesses
would enable IFIs to earn higher profits, as businesses in the real sector normally earn,
and pass on a greater part of the profits so earned to the savers/investors. In addition to
securitizing their asset portfolios, they may resort to fund management and invest in Shirkah-
based variable income and trade and leasing-based quasi-fixed income operations to provide
a Shar ¯ı´ah-compliant investment facility to various classes of investors according to their
risk profiles and preferences.
Islamic banks’ operations must have positive socio-economic implications through real
sector development and just and equitable pricing policies, in addition to cost efficiency and
profit adequacy. For this purpose, IFIs should look beyond the formal abolition of interest


----- p.480 (pdf 508) -----


480 Understanding Islamic Finance
and practically involve themselves in real business activities. In the words of Zubair Hasan,
an economist at the International Islamic University of Malaysia: “One must see Islamic
banking as an on-going process in a social milieu characterized with mass poverty and gross
inequalities in the wealth, income and opportunities”. 13
The regulators, authorities in governments and the practitioners in Islamic banking have
to work together in order to take care of areas like education, training and public awareness
about the Islamic financial system, effective enforcement of contracts, strengthening recovery
systems and conducting internal and external Shar ¯ı´ah compliance audit of IFIs’ operations.
Strengthening the regulatory set-up, facilitating IFIs to offer suitable products, designing
prudential rules to reflect the specific risk characteristics of Islamic financial contracts
and application of well-thought-out risk management and accounting standards will be
instrumental in deepening and widening the financial sector. Regulators need to provide
an enabling environment and ensure that proper procedures for good corporate governance,
transparency and ensuring Shar ¯ı´ah compliance are in place.
The use of Islamic finance principles for public sector financing needs more attention, as
it could be helpful in ensuring fiscal discipline and thus giving a just basis for monetary
management.
13 Hasan, 2005, pp. 229–248.

