Introduction 
CATHOLIC philosophy, in the sense in which I shall use the term, is that which dominated
European thought from Augustine to the Renaissance. There have been philosophers, before and
after this period of ten centuries, who belonged to the same general school. Before Augustine
there were the early Fathers, especially Origen; after the Renaissance there are many, including, at
the present day, all orthodox Catholic teachers of philosophy, who adhere to some medieval
system, especially that of Thomas Aquinas. But it is only from Augustine to the Renaissance that
the greatest philosophers of the age are concerned in building up or perfecting the Catholic
synthesis. In the Christian centuries before Augustine, Stoics and Neoplatonists outshine the
Fathers in philosophic ability; after the Renaissance, none of the outstanding philosophers, even
among those who were orthodox Catholics, were concerned to carry on the Scholastic or the
Augustinian tradition. 
The period with which we shall be concerned in this book differs from earlier and later times not
only in philosophy, but in many other ways. The most notable of these is the power of the Church.
The Church brought philosophic beliefs into a closer relation to social and political circumstances
than they have ever had before or since the medieval period, which we may reckon from about
A.D. 400 to about A.D. 1400. The Church is a social institution built upon a creed, partly
philosophic, partly concerned with sacred history. It achieved power 
-301- 

and wealth by means of its creed. The lay rulers, who were in frequent conflict with it, were
defeated because the great majority of the population, including most of the lay rulers themselves,
were profoundly convinced of the truth of the Catholic faith. There were traditions, Roman and
Germanic, against which the Church had to fight. The Roman tradition was strongest in Italy,
especially among lawyers; the German tradition was strongest in the feudal aristocracy that arose
out of the barbarian conquest. But for many centuries neither of these traditions proved strong
enough to generate a successful opposition to the Church; and this was largely due to the fact that
they were not embodied in any adequate philosophy. 
A history of thought, such as that upon which we are engaged, is unavoidably one-sided in dealing
with the Middle Ages. With very few exceptions, all the men of this period who contributed to the
intellectual life of their time were churchmen. The laity in the Middle Ages slowly built up a
vigorous political and economic system, but their activities were in a sense blind. There was, in
the later Middle Ages, an important lay literature, very different from that of the Church; in a
general history, this literature would demand more consideration than is called for in a history of
philosophic thought. It is not until we come to Dante that we find a layman writing with full
knowledge of the ecclesiastical philosophy of his time. Until the fourteenth century, ecclesiastics
have a virtual monopoly of philosophy, and philosophy, accordingly, is written from the
standpoint of the Church. For this reason, medieval thought cannot be made intelligible without a
fairly extensive account of the growth of ecclesiastical institutions, and especially of the papacy. 
The medieval world, as contrasted with the world of antiquity, is characterized by various forms
of dualism. There is the dualism of clergy and laity, the dualism of Latin and Teuton, the dualism
of the kingdom of God and the kingdoms of this world, the dualism of the spirit and the flesh. All
these are exemplified in the dualism of Pope and Emperor. The dualism of Latin and Teuton is an
outcome of the barbarian invasion, but the others have older sources. The relations of clergy and
laity, for the Middle Ages, were to be modelled on the relations of Samuel and Saul; the demand
for the supremacy of the clergy arose out of the period of Arian or semi-Arian emperors and kings.
The dualism of the kingdom of God and the kingdoms of this 
-302- 

world is found in the New Testament, but was systematized in Saint Augustine City of God. The
dualism of the spirit and the flesh is to be found in Plato, and was emphasized by the
Neoplatonists; it is important in the teaching of Saint Paul; and it dominated the Christian
asceticism of the fourth and fifth centuries. 
Catholic philosophy is divided into two periods by the dark ages, during which, in Western
Europe, intellectual activity was almost non-existent. From the conversion of Constantine to the
death of Boethius, the thoughts of Christian philosophers are still dominated by the Roman
Empire, either as an actuality or as a recent memory. The barbarians, in this period, are regarded
merely as a nuisance, not as an independent part of Christendom. There is still a civilized
community, in which all well-to-do people can read and write, and a philosopher has to appeal to
the laity as well as to the clergy. Between this period and the dark ages, at the end of the sixth
century, stands Gregory the Great, who regards himself as a subject of the Byzantine emperor, but
is lordly in his attitude to barbarian kings. After his time, throughout Western Christendom, the
separation of clergy and laity becomes more and more marked. The lay aristocracy creates the
feudal system, which slightly tempers the prevailing turbulent anarchy; Christian humility is
preached by the clergy, but practised only by the lower classes; pagan pride is embodied in the
duel, trial by battle, tournaments, and private revenge, all of which the Church dislikes but cannot
prevent. With great difficulty, beginning in the eleventh century, the Church succeeds in
emancipating itself from the feudal aristocracy, and this emancipation is one of the causes of the
emergence of Europe from the dark ages. 
The first great period of Catholic philosophy was dominated by Saint Augustine, and by Plato
among the pagans. The second period culminates in Saint Thomas Aquinas, for whom, and for his
successors, Aristotle far outweighs Plato. The dualism of The City of God, however, survives in
full force. The Church represents the City of God, and politically philosophers stand for the
interests of the Church. Philosophy was concerned to defend the faith, and invoked reason to
enable it to argue with those who, like the Mohammedans, did not accept the validity of the
Christian revelation. By this invocation of reason the philosophers challenged criticism, not
merely as theologians, but as inventors of systems designed to appeal to men of no 
-303- 

matter what creed. In the long run, the appeal to reason was perhaps a mistake, but in the
thirteenth century it seemed highly successful. 
The thirteenth-century synthesis, which had an air of completeness and finality, was destroyed by
a variety of causes. Perhaps the most important of these was the growth of a rich commercial
class, first in Italy, and then elsewhere. The feudal aristocracy, in the main, had been ignorant,
stupid, and barbaric; the common people had sided with the Church as superior to the nobles in
intelligence, in morality, and in capacity to combat anarchy. But the new commercial class were as
intelligent as the clergy, as well informed in mundane matters, more capable of coping with the
nobles, and more acceptable to the urban lower classes as champions of civic liberty. Democratic
tendencies came to the fore, and after helping the Pope to defeat the Emperor, set to work to
emancipate economic life from ecclesiastical control. 
Another cause of the end of the Middle Ages was the rise of strong national monarchies in France,
England, and Spain. Having suppressed internal anarchy, and allied themselves with the rich
merchants against the aristocracy, the kings, after the middle of the fifteenth century, were strong
enough to fight the Pope in the national interest. 
The papacy, meanwhile, had lost the moral prestige which it had enjoyed, and on the whole
deserved, in the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries. First by subservience to France during
the period when the popes lived at Avignon, then by the Great Schism, they had unintentionally
persuaded the Western world that an unchecked papal autocracy was neither possible nor
desirable. In the fifteenth century, their position as rulers of Christendom became subordinate, in
practice, to their position as Italian princes, involved in the complex and unscrupulous game of
Italian power politics. 
And so the Renaissance and the Reformation disrupted the medieval synthesis, which has not yet
been succeeded by anything so tidy and so apparently complete. The growth and decay of this
synthesis is the subject of Book II. 
The mood of thoughtful men, throughout the whole period, was one of deep unhappiness in regard
to the affairs of this world, only rendered endurable by the hope of a better world hereafter. This
unhappiness was a reflection of what was happening throughout Western Europe. The third
century was a period of disaster, when the 
-304- 

general level of well-being was sharply lowered. After a lull during the fourth century, the fifth
brought the extinction of the Western Empire and the establishment of barbarians throughout its
former territory. The cultivated urban rich, upon whom late Roman civilization depended, were
largely reduced to the condition of destitute refugees; the remainder took to living on their rural
estates. Fresh shocks continued until about A.D. 1000, without any sufficient breathing space to
allow of recovery. The wars of Byzantines and Lombards destroyed most of what remained of the
civilization of Italy. The Arabs conquered most of the territory of the Eastern Empire, established
themselves in Africa and Spain, threatened France, and even, on one occasion, sacked Rome. The
Danes and Normans caused havoc in France and England, in Sicily and Southern Italy. Life,
throughout these centuries, was precarious and full of hardship. Bad as it was in reality, gloomy
superstitions made it even worse. It was thought that the great majority even of Christians would
go to hell. At every moment, men felt themselves encompassed by evil spirits, and exposed to the
machinations of sorcerers and witches. No joy of life was possible, except, in fortunate moments,
to those who retained the thoughtlessness of children. The general misery heightened the intensity
of religious feeling. The life of the good here below was a pilgrimage to the heavenly city; nothing
of value was possible in the sublunary world except the steadfast virtue that would lead, in the
end, to eternal bliss. The Greeks, in their great days, had found joy and beauty in the every-day
world. Empedocles, apostrophizing his fellow-citizens, says: "Friends, that inhabit the great town
looking down on the yellow rock of Acragas, up by the citadel, busy in goodly works, harbour of
honour for the stranger, men unskilled in meanness, all hail." In later times, until the Renaissance,
men had no such simple happiness in the visible world, but turned their hopes to the unseen.
Acragas is replaced in their love by Jerusalem the Golden. When earthly happiness at last
returned, the intensity of longing for the other world grew gradually less. Men used the same
words, but with a less profound sincerity. 
In the attempt to make the genesis and significance of Catholic philosophy intelligible, I have
found it necessary to devote more space to general history than is demanded in connection with
either ancient 
-305- 
