century was Boethius translation of the Categories and De Emendatione. Thus Aristotle was
conceived as a mere dialectician, and Plato as only a religious philosopher and the author of the
theory of ideas. During the course of the later Middle Ages, both these partial conceptions were
gradually emended, especially the conception of Aristotle. But the process, as regards Plato,
was not completed until the Renaissance. 
CHAPTER X Mohammedan Culture and Philosophy 
THE attacks upon the Eastern Empire, Africa, and Spain differed from those of Northern
barbarians on the West in two respects: first, the Eastern Empire survived till 1453, nearly a
thousand years longer than the Western; second, the main attacks upon the Eastern Empire were
made by Mohammedans, who did not become Christians after conquest, but developed an
important civilization of their own. 
The Hegira, * with which the Mohammedan era begins, took place in A.D. 622; Mahomet died
ten years later. Immediately after his death the Arab conquests began, and they proceeded with
extraordinary rapidity. In the East, Syria was invaded in 634, and completely subdued within
two years. In 637 Persia was invaded; in 650 its conquest was completed. India was invaded in
664; Constantinople was besieged in 669 (and again in 716-17). The westward movement was
not quite so sudden. Egypt was conquered by 642, Carthage not till 697. Spain, except for a
small corner in the north-west, was acquired in 711-12. Westward expansion (except in Sicily
and Southern Italy) was brought to a standstill by the defeat of the Mohammedans at the battle
of Tours in 732, just one hundred years after the death of the 
____________________ 
* The Hegira was Mahomet's flight from Mecca to Medina. 
-419- 

Prophet. (The Ottoman Turks, who finally conquered Constantinople, belong to a later period than
that with which we are now concerned.) 
Various circumstances facilitated this expansion. Persia and the Eastern Empire were exhausted
by their long wars. The Syrians, who were largely Nestorian, suffered persecution at the hands of
the Catholics, whereas Mohammedans tolerated all sects of Christians in return for the payment of
tribute. Similarly in Egypt the Monophysites, who were the bulk of the population, welcomed the
invaders. In Africa, the Arabs allied themselves with the Berbers, whom the Romans had never
thoroughly subdued. Arabs and Berbers together invaded Spain, where they were helped by the
Jews, whom the Visigoths had severely persecuted. 
The religion of the Prophet was a simple monotheism, uncomplicated by the elaborate theology of
rite Trinity and the Incarnation. The Prophet made no claim to be divine, nor did his followers
make such a claim on his behalf. He revived the Jewish prohibition of graven images, and forbade
the use of wine. It was the duty of the faithful to conquer as much of the world as possible for
Islam, but there was to be no persecution of Christians, Jews, or Zoroastrians-the "people of the
Book," as the Koran calls them, i.e., those who followed the teaching of a Scripture. 
Arabia was largely desert, and was growing less and less capable of supporting its population. The
first conquests of the Arabs began as mere raids for plunder, and only turned into permanent
occupation after experience had shown the weakness of the enemy. Suddenly, in the course of
some twenty years, men accustomed to all the hardships of a meagre existence on the fringe of the
desert found themselves masters of some of the richest regions of the world, able to enjoy every
luxury and to acquire all the refinements of an ancient civilization. They withstood the
temptations of this transformation better than most of the Northern barbarians had done. As they
had acquired their empire without much severe fighting, there had been little destruction, and the
civil administration was kept on almost unchanged. Both in Persia and in the Byzantine Empire,
the civil government had been highly organized. The Arab tribesmen, at first, understood nothing
of its complications, and perforce accepted the services of the trained men whom they found in
charge. These men, for the most part, 
-420- 

showed no reluctance to serve under their new masters. Indeed, the change made their work
easier, since taxation was lightened very considerably. The populations, moreover, in order to
escape the tribute, very largely abandoned Christianity for Islam. 
The Arab Empire was an absolute monarchy, under the caliph, who was the successor of the
Prophet, and inherited much of his holiness. The caliphate was nominally elective, but soon
became hereditary. The first dynasty, that of the Umayyads, which lasted till 750, was founded by
men whose acceptance of Mahomet was purely political, and it remained always opposed to the
more fanatical among the faithful. The Arabs, although they conquered a great part of the world in
the name of a new religion, were not a very religious race; the motive of their conquests was
plunder and wealth rather than religion. It was only in virtue of their lack of fanaticism that a
handful of warriors were able to govern, without much difficulty, vast populations of higher
civilization and alien religion. 
The Persians, on the contrary, have been, from the earliest times, deeply religious and highly
speculative. After their conversion, they made out of Islam something much more interesting,
more religious, and more philosophical, than had been imagined by the Prophet and his kinsmen.
Ever since the death of Mahomet's son-in-law Ali in 661, Mohammedans have been divided into
two sects, the Sunni and the Shiah. The former is the larger; the latter follows Ali, and considers
the Umayyad dynasty to have been usurpers. The Persians have always belonged to the Shiah sect.
Largely by Persian influence, the Umayyads were at last overthrown, and succeeded by the
Abbasids, who represented Persian interests. The change was marked by the removal of the capital
from Damascus to Baghdad. 
The Abbasids were, politically, more in favour of the fanatics than the Umayyads had been. They
did not, however, acquire the whole of the empire. One member of the Umayyad family escaped
the general massacre, fled to Spain, and was there acknowledged as the legitimate ruler. From that
time on, Spain was independent of the rest of the Mohammedan world. 
Under the early Abbasids the caliphate attained its greatest splendour. The best known of them is
Harun-al-Rashid (d. 809), who was a contemporary of Charlemagne and the Empress Irene and is
known 
-421- 

to every one in legendary form through the Arabian Nights. His court was a brilliant centre of
luxury, poetry, and learning; his revenue was enormous; his empire stretched from the Straits of
Gibraltar to the Indus. His will was absolute; he was habitually accompanied by the
executioner, who performed his office at a nod from the caliph. This splendour, however, was
short-lived. His successor made the mistake of composing his army mainly of Turks, who were
insubordinate, and soon reduced the caliph to a cipher, to be blinded or murdered whenever the
soldiery grew tired of him. Nevertheless, the caliphate lingered on; the last caliph of the
Abbasid dynasty was put to death by the Mongols in 1256, along with 800,000 of the
inhabitants of Baghdad. 
The political and social system of the Arabs had defects similar to those of the Roman Empire,
together with some others. Absolute monarchy combined with polygamy led, as it usually does,
to dynastic wars whenever a ruler died, ending with the victory of one of the ruler's sons and the
death of all the rest. There were immense numbers of slaves, largely as a result of successful
wars; at times there were dangerous servile insurrections. Commerce was greatly developed, the
more so as the caliphate occupied a central position between East and West. "Not only did the
possession of enormous wealth create a demand for costly articles, such as silks from China and
furs from Northern Europe, but trade was promoted by certain special conditions, such as the
vast extent of the Muslim empire, the spread of Arabic as a world-language, and the exalted
status assigned to the merchant in the Muslim system of ethics; it was remembered that the
Prophet himself had been a merchant and had commended trading during the pilgrimage to
Mecca." * This commerce, like military cohesion, depended on the great roads which the Arabs
inherited from Romans and Persians, and which they, unlike the Northern conquerors, did not
allow to fall into disrepair. Gradually, however, the empire broke up into fractions--Spain,
Persia, North Africa, and Egypt successively split off and acquired complete or almost complete
independence. 
One of the best features of the Arab economy was agriculture, particularly the skilful use of
irrigation, which they learnt from living 
____________________ 
* Cambridge Medieval History, IV, 286. 
-422- 

where water is scarce. To this day Spanish agriculture profits by Arab irrigation works. 
The distinctive culture of the Muslim world, though it began in Syria, soon came to flourish most
in the Eastern and Western extremities, Persia and Spain. The Syrians, at the time of the conquest,
were admirers of Aristotle, whom Nestorians preferred to Plato, the philosopher favoured by
Catholics. The Arabs first acquired their knowledge of Greek philosophy from the Syrians, and
thus, from the beginning, they thought Aristotle more important than Plato. Nevertheless, their
Aristotle wore a Neoplatonic dress. Kindi (d. ca. 873), the first to write philosophy in Arabic, and
the only philosopher of note who was himself an Arab, translated parts of the Enneads of Plotinus,
and published his translation under the title The Theology of Aristotle. This introduced great
confusion into Arabic ideas of Aristotle, from which it took Arabic philosophy centuries to
recover. 
Meanwhile, in Persia, Muslims came in contact with India. It was from Sanskrit writings that they
acquired, during the eighth century, their first knowledge of astronomy. About 830, Muhammad
ibn Musa al-Khwarazmi, a translator of mathematical and astronomical books from the Sanskrit,
published a book which was translated into Latin in the twelfth century, under the title Algoritmi
de numero Indorum. It was from this book that the West first learnt of what we call "Arabic"
numerals, which ought to be called "Indian." The same author wrote a book on algebra which was
used in the West as a text. book until the sixteenth century. 
Persian civilization remained both intellectually and artistically admirable until the invasion of the
Mongols in the thirteenth century, from which it never recovered. Omar Khayyám, the only man
known to me who was both a poet and a mathematician, reformed the calendar in 1079. His best
friend, oddly enough, was the founder of the sect of the Assassins, the "Old Man of the Mountain"
of legendary fame. The Persians were great poets: Firdousi (ca. 941), author of the Shahnama, is
said by those who have read him to be the equal of Homer. They were also remarkable as mystics,
which other Mohammedans were not. The Sufi sect, which still exists, allowed itself great latitude
in the mystical and allegorical interpretation of orthodox dogma; it was more or less Neoplatonic. 
The Nestorians, through whom, at first, Greek influences came 
-423- 

into the Muslim world, were by no means purely Greek in their outlook. Their school at Edessa
had been closed by the Emperor Zeno in 481; its learned men thereupon migrated to Persia, where
they continued their work, but not without suffering Persian influences. The Nestorians valued
Aristotle only for his logic, and it was above all his logic that the Arabic philosophers thought
important at first. Later, however, they studied also his Metaphysics and his De Anima. Arabic
philosophers, in general, are encyclopedic: they are interested in alchemy, astrology, astronomy,
and zoology, as much as in what we should call philosophy. They were looked upon with
suspicion by the populace, which was fanatical and bigoted; they owed their safety (when they
were safe) to the protection of comparatively freethinking princes. 
Two Mohammedan philosophers, one of Persia, one of Spain, demand special notice; they are
Avicenna and Averroes. Of these the former is the more famous among Mohammedans, the latter
among Christians. 
Avicenna (Ibn Sina) ( 980-1037) spent his life in the sort of places that one used to think only
exist in poetry. He was born in the province of Bokhara; at the age of twenty-four he went to
Khiva--"lone Khiva in the waste"--then to Khorassan--"the lone Chorasmian shore." For a while
he taught medicine and philosophy at Ispahan; then he settled at Teheran. He was even more
famous in medicine than in philosophy, though he added little to Galen. From the twelfth to the
seventeenth century, he was used in Europe as a guide to medicine. He was not a saintly character,
in fact he had a passion for wine and women. He was suspect to the orthodox, but was befriended
by princes on account of his medical skill. At times he got into trouble owing to the hostility of
Turkish mercenaries; sometimes he was in hiding, sometimes in prison. He was the author of an
encyclopædia, almost unknown to the East because of the hostility of theologians, but influential
in the West through Latin translations. His psychology has an empirical tendency. 
His philosophy is nearer to Aristotle, and less Neoplatonic, than that of his Muslim predecessors.
Like the Christian scholastics later, he is occupied with the problem of universals. Plato said they
were anterior to things. Aristotle has two views, one when he is thinking, 
-424- 

the other when he is combating Plato. This makes him ideal material for the commentator. 
Avicenna invented a formula, which was repeated by Averroes and Albertus Magnus: "Thought
brings about the generality in forms." From this it might be supposed that he did not believe in
universals apart from thought. This, however, would be an unduly simple view. Genera--that is,
universals--are, he says, at once before things, in things, and after things. He explains this as
follows. They are before things in God's understanding. (God decides, for instance, to create
cats. This requires that He should have the idea "cat," which is thus, in this respect, anterior to
particular cats.) Genera are in things in natural objects. (When cats have been created, felinity is
in each of them.) Genera are after things in our thought. (When we have seen many cats, we
notice their likeness to each other, and arrive at the general idea "cat.") This view is obviously
intended to reconcile different theories. 
Averroes (Ibn Rushd) ( 1126-1198) lived at the opposite end of the Muslim world from
Avicenna. He was born at Cordova, where his father and grandfather had been cadis; he himself
was a cadi, first in Seville, then in Cordova. He studied, first, theology and jurisprudence, then
medicine, mathematics, and philosophy. He was recommended to the "Caliph" Abu Yaqub
Yusuf as a man capable of making an analysis of the works of Aristotle. (It seems, however,
that he did not know Greek.) This ruler took him into favour; in 1184 he made him his
physician, but unfortunately the patient died two years later. His successor, Yaqub Al-Mansur,
for eleven years continued his father's patronage; then, alarmed by the opposition of the
orthodox to the philosopher, he deprived him of his position, and exiled him, first to a small
place near Cordova, and then to Morocco. He was accused of cultivating the philosophy of the
ancients at the expense of the true faith. Al-Mansur published an edict to the effect that God had
decreed hell-fire for those who thought that truth could be found by the unaided reason. All the
books that could be found on logic and metaphysics were given to the flames. * 
Shortly after this time the Moorish territory in Spain was greatly diminished by Christian
conquests. Muslim philosophy in Spain ended 
____________________ 
* It is said that Averroes was taken back into favour shortly before his death. 
-425- 

with Averroes; and in the rest of the Mohammedan world a rigid orthodoxy put an end to
speculation. 
Ueberweg, rather amusingly, undertakes to defend Averroes against the charge of unorthodoxy--a
matter, one would say, for Muslims to decide. Ueberweg points out that, according to the mystics,
every text of the Koran had 7 or 70 or 700 layers of interpretation, the literal meaning being only
for the ignorant vulgar. It would seem to follow that a philosopher's teaching could not possibly
conflict with the Koran; for among 700 interpretations there would surely be at least one that
would fit what the philosopher had to say. In the Mohammedan world, however, the ignorant
seem to have objected to all learning that went beyond a knowledge of the Holy Book; it was
dangerous, even if no specific heresy could be demonstrated. The view of the mystics, that the
populace should take the Koran literally but wise people need not do so, was hardly likely to win
wide popular acceptance. 
Averroes was concerned to improve the Arabic interpretation of Aristotle, which had been unduly
influenced by Neoplatonism. He gave to Aristotle the sort of reverence that is given to the founder
of a religion--much more than was given even by Avicenna. He holds that the existence of God
can be proved by reason independently of revelation, a view also held by Thomas Aquinas. As
regards immortality, he seems to have adhered closely to Aristotle, maintaining that the soul is not
immortal, but intellect (nous) is. This, however, does not secure personal immortality, since
intellect is one and the same when manifested in different persons. This view, naturally, was
combated by Christian philosophers. 
Averroes, like most of the later Mohammedan philosophers, though a believer, was not rigidly
orthodox. There was a sect of completely orthodox theologians, who objected to all philosophy as
deleterious to the faith. One of these, named Algazel, wrote a book called Destruction of the
Philosophers, pointing out that, since all necessary truth is in the Koran, there is no need of
speculation independent of revelation. Averroes replied by a book called Destruction of the
Destruction. The religious dogmas that Algazel specially upheld against the philosophers were the
creation of the world in time out of nothing, the reality of the divine attributes, and the
resurrection of the body. Averroes regards religion as containing philosophic truth in allegorical
form. This applies in particular to creation, which he, 
-426- 
