Catania (d. 1162) translated the Phaedo and Meno, but his translations had no immediate effect.
Partial as was the knowledge of Greek philosophy in the twelfth century, learned men were aware
that much of it remained to be discovered by the West, and a certain eagerness arose to acquire a
fuller knowledge of antiquity. The yoke of orthodoxy was not so severe as is sometimes supposed;
a man could always write his book, and then, if necessary, withdraw its heretical portions after full
public discussion. Most of the philosophers of the time were French, and France was important to
the Church as a makeweight against the Empire. Whatever theological heresies might occur
among them, learned clerics were almost all politically orthodox; this made the peculiar
wickedness of Arnold of Brescia, who was an exception to the rule. The whole of early
scholasticism may be viewed, politically, as an offshoot of the Church's struggle for power. 
CHAPTER XII The Thirteenth Century 
IN the thirteenth century the Middle Ages reached a culmination. The synthesis which had been
gradually built up since the fall of Rome became as complete as it was capable of being. The
fourteenth century brought a dissolution of institutions and philosophies; the fifteenth brought the
beginning of those that we still regard as modern. The great men of the thirteenth century were
very great: Innocent III, Saint Francis, Frederick II, and Thomas Aquinas are, in their different
ways, supreme representatives of their respective types. There were also great achievements not so
definitely associated with great names: the Gothic cathedrals of France, the romantic literature of
Charlemagne, Arthur, and the Niebelungen, the beginnings of constitutional government in Magna
Carta and the House of Commons. The matter that concerns us most directly is the scholastic
philosophy, especially as set forth by Aquinas; but I shall leave this for the next chapter, and
attempt, first, to give an 
-441- 

outline of the events that did most to form the mental atmosphere of the age. 
The central figure at the beginning of the century is Pope Innocent III ( 1198-1216), a shrewd
politician, a man of infinite vigour, a firm believer in the most extreme claims of the papacy, but
not endowed with Christian humility. At his consecration, he preached from the text: "See, I have
this day set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to pluck up and to break down, to
destroy and to overthrow, to build and to plant." He called himself "king of kings, lord of lords, a
priest for ever and ever according to the order of Melchizedek." In enforcing this view of himself,
he took advantage of every favourable circumstance. In Sicily, which had been conquered by the
Emperor Henry VI (d. 1197), who had married Constance, heiress of the Norman kings, the new
king was Frederick, only three years old at the time of Innocent's accession. The kingdom was
turbulent, and Constance needed the Pope's help. She made him guardian of the infant Frederick,
and secured his recognition of her son's rights in Sicily by acknowledging papal superiority.
Portugal and Aragon made similar acknowledgements. In England, King John, after vehement
resistance, was compelled to yield his kingdom to Innocent and receive it back as a papal fief. 
To some degree, the Venetians got the better of him in the matter of the fourth Crusade. The
soldiers of the Cross were to embark at Venice, but there were difficulties in procuring enough
ships. No one had enough except the Venetians, and they maintained (for purely commercial
reasons) that it would be much better to conquer Constantinople than Jerusalem--in any case, it
would be a useful stepping-stone, and the Eastern Empire had never been very friendly to
Crusaders. It was found necessary to give way to Venice; Constantinople was captured, and a
Latin Emperor established. At first Innocent was annoyed; but he reflected that it might now be
possible to re-unite the Eastern and Western Churches. (This hope proved vain.) Except in this
instance, I do not know of anybody who ever in any degree got the better of Innocent III. He
ordered the great Crusade against the Albigenses, which rooted out heresy, happiness, prosperity,
and culture from southern France. He deposed Raymond, Count of Toulouse, for lukewarmness
about the Crusade, and secured most of the region of the Albigenses for its leader, Simon de 
-442- 

Montfort, father of the father of Parliament. He quarrelled with the Emperor Otto, and called upon
the Germans to depose him. They did so, and at his suggestion elected Frederick II, now just of
age, in his stead. But for his support of Frederick he exacted a terrific price in promises--which,
however, Frederick was determined to break as soon as possible. 
Innocent III was the first great Pope in whom there was no element of sanctity. The reform of the
Church made the hierarchy feel secure as to its moral prestige, and therefore convinced that it
need no longer trouble to be holy. The power motive, from his time on, more and more
exclusively dominated the papacy, and produced opposition from some religious men even in his
day. He codified the canon law so as to increase the power of the Curia; Walther von der
Vogelweide called this code "the blackest book that hell ever gave." Although the papacy still had
resounding victories to win, the manner of its subsequent decline might already have been
foreseen. 
Frederick II, who had been the ward of Innocent III, went to Germany in 1212, and by the Pope's
help was elected to replace Otto. Innocent did not live to see what a formidable antagonist he had
raised up against the papacy. 
Frederick--one of the most remarkable rulers known to history-had passed his childhood and
youth in difficult and adverse circumstances. His father Henry VI (son of Barbarossa) had
defeated the Normans of Sicily, and married Constance, heiress to the kingdom. He established a
German garrison, which was hated by the Sicilians; but he died in 1197, when Frederick was three
years old. Constance thereupon turned against the Germans, and tried to govern without them by
the help of the Pope. The Germans were resentful, and Otto tried to conquer Sicily; this was the
cause of his quarrel with the Pope. Palermo, where Frederick passed his childhood, was subject to
other troubles. There were Muslim revolts; the Pisans and Genoese fought each other and every
one else for possession of the island; the important people in Sicily were constantly changing
sides, according as one party or the other offered the higher price for treachery. Culturally,
however, Sicily had great advantages. Muslim, Byzantine, Italian, and, German civilization met
and mingled there as nowhere else. Greek and Arabic were still living languages in Sicily.
Frederick learnt to speak six languages fluently, and in all six 
-443- 

he was witty. He was at home in Arabian philosophy, and had friendly relations with
Mohammedans, which scandalized pious Christians. He was a Hohenstaufen, and in Germany
could count as a German. But in culture and sentiment he was Italian, with a tincture of Byzantine
and Arab. His contemporaries gazed upon him with astonishment gradually turning into horror;
they called him "wonder of the world and marvellous innovator." While still alive, he was the
subject of myths. He was said to be the author of a book De Tribus Impostoribus--the three
impostors were Moses, Christ, and Mahomet. This book, which never existed, was attributed,
successively, to many enemies of the Church, the last of whom was Spinoza. 
The words "Guelf" and "Ghibelline" began to be used at the time of Frederick's contest with the
Emperor Otto. They are corruptions of "Welf" and "Waiblingen," the family names of the two
contestants. ( Otto's nephew was an ancestor of the British royal family.) 
Innocent III died in 1216; Otto, whom Frederick had defeated, died in 1218. The new Pope,
Honorius III, was at first on good terms with Frederick, but difficulties soon arose. First, Frederick
refused to go on Crusade; then he had trouble with the Lombard cities, which in 1226 contracted
an offensive and defensive alliance for twentyfive years. They hated the Germans; one of their
poets wrote fiery verses against them: "Love not the folk of Germany; far, far from you be these
mad dogs." This seems to have expressed the general feeling in Lombardy. Frederick wanted to
remain in Italy to deal with the cities, but in 1227 Honorius died, and was succeeded by Gregory
IX, a fiery ascetic who loved Saint Francis and was beloved by him. (He canonized Saint Francis
two years after his death.) Gregory thought nothing else so important as the Crusade, and
excommunicated Frederick for not undertaking it. Frederick, who had married the daughter and
heiress of the King of Jerusalem, was willing enough to go when he could, and called himself
King of Jerusalem. In 1228, while still excommunicate, he went; this made Gregory even more
angry than his previously not going, for how could the crusading host be led by a man whom the
Pope had banned? Arrived in Palestine, Frederick made friends with the Mohammedans,
explained to them that the Christians attached importance to Jerusalem although it was of little
strategic value, and succeeded in inducing them peaceably to restore the city to him. This made
the Pope 
-444- 

still more furious--one should fight the infidel, not negotiate with him. However, Frederick was
duly crowned in Jerusalem, and no one could deny that he had been successful. Peace between
Pope and Emperor was restored in 1230. 
During the few years of peace that followed, the Emperor devoted himself to the affairs of the
kingdom of Sicily. By the help of his prime minister, Pietro dera Vigna, he promulgated a new
legal code, derived from Roman law, and showing a high level of civilization in his southern
dominion; the code was at once translated into Greek, for the benefit of the Greek-speaking
inhabitants. He founded an important university at Naples. He minted gold coins, called
"augustals," the first gold coins in the West for many centuries. He established freer trade, and
abolished all internal customs. He even summoned elected representatives of the cities to his
council, which, however, had only consultative powers. 
This period of peace ended when Frederick again came into conflict with the Lombard League in
1237; the Pope threw in his lot with them, and again excommunicated the Emperor. From this
time until Frederick's death in 1250, the war was practically continuous, growing, on both sides,
gradually more bitter, cruel, and treacherous. There were great fluctuations of fortune, and the
issue was still undecided when the Emperor died. But those who attempted to be his successors
had not his power, and were gradually defeated, leaving Italy divided and the Pope victorious. 
Deaths of popes made little difference in the struggle; each new pope took up his predecessor's
policy practically unchanged. Gregory IX died in 1241; in 1243 Innocent IV, a bitter enemy of
Frederick, was elected. Louis IX, in spite of his impeccable orthodoxy, tried to moderate the fury
of Gregory and Innocent IV, but in vain. Innocent, especially, rejected all overtures from the
Emperor, and used all manner of unscrupulous expedients against him. He pronounced him
deposed, declared a crusade against him, and excommunicated all who supported him. The friars
preached against him, the Muslims rose, there were plots among his prominent nominal
supporters. All this made Frederick increasingly cruel; plotters were ferociously punished, and
prisoners were deprived of the right eye and the right hand. 
At one time during this titanic struggle, Frederick thought of founding a new religion, in which he
was to be the Messiah, and his 
-445- 

minister Pietro della Vigna was to take the place of Saint Peter. * He did not get so far as to
make this project public, but wrote about it to della Vigna. Suddenly, however, he became
convinced, rightly or wrongly, that Pietro was plotting against him; he blinded him, and
exhibited him publicly in a cage; Pietro, however, avoided further suffering by suicide. 
Frederick, in spite of his abilities, could not have succeeded, because the antipapal forces that
existed in his time were pious and democratic, whereas his aim was something like a restoration
of the pagan Roman Empire. In culture he was enlightened, but politically he was retrograde.
His court was oriental; he had a harem with eunuchs. But it was in this court that Italian poetry
began; he himself had some merit as a poet. In his conflict with the papacy, he published
controversial statements as to the dangers of ecclesiastical absolutism, which would have been
applauded in the sixteenth century, but fell flat in his own day. The heretics, who should have
been his allies, appeared to him simply rebels, and to please the Pope he persecuted them. The
free cities, but for the Emperor, might have opposed the Pope; but so long as Frederick
demanded their submission they welcomed the Pope as an ally. Thus, although he was free from
the superstitions of his age, and in culture far above other contemporary rulers, his position as
Emperor compelled him to oppose all that was politically liberal. He failed inevitably, but of all
the failures in history he remains one of the most interesting. 
The heretics, against whom Innocent III crusaded, and whom all rulers (including Frederick)
persecuted, deserve study, both in themselves and as giving a glimpse of popular feeling, of
which, otherwise, hardly a hint appears in the writings of the time. 
The most interesting, and also the largest, of the heretical sects were the Cathari, who, in the
South of France, are better known as Albigenses. Their doctrines came from Asia by way of the
Balkans; they were widely held in Northern Italy, and in the South of France they were held by
the great majority, including nobles, who liked the excuse to seize Church lands. The cause of
this wide diffusion of heresy was partly disappointment at the failure of the Crusades, but
mainly moral disgust at the wealth and wickedness of the clergy. 
____________________ 
* See the life of Frederick II, by Hermann Kantorowicz. 
-446- 

There was a wide-spread feeling, analogous to later puritanism, in favour of personal holiness;
this was associated with a cult of poverty. The Church was rich and largely worldly; very many
priests were grossly immoral. The friars brought accusations against the older orders and the
parish priests, asserting abuse of the confessional for purposes of seduction; and the enemies of
the friars retorted the accusation. There can be no doubt that such charges were largely justified.
The more the Church claimed supremacy on religious grounds, the more plain people were
shocked by the contrast between profession and performance. The same motives which ultimately
led to the Reformation were operative in the thirteenth century. The main difference was that
secular rulers were not ready to throw in their lot with the heretics; and this was largely because
no existing philosophy could reconcile heresy with the claims of kings to dominion. 
The tenets of the Cathari cannot be known with certainty, as we are entirely dependent on the
testimony of their enemies. Moreover ecclesiastics, being well versed in the history of heresy,
tended to apply some familiar label, and to attribute to existing sects all the tenets of former ones,
often on the basis of some not very close resemblance. Nevertheless, there is a good deal that is
almost beyond question. It seems that the Cathari were dualists, and that, like the Gnostics, they
considered the Old Testament Jehovah a wicked demiurge, the true God being only revealed in the
New Testament. They regarded matter as essentially evil, and believed that for the virtuous there
is no resurrection of the body. The wicked, however, will suffer transmigration into the bodies of
animals. On this ground they were vegetarians, abstaining even from eggs, cheese, and milk. They
ate fish, however, because they believed that fishes are not sexually generated. All sex was
abhorrent to them; marriage, some said, is even worse than adultery, because it is continuous and
complacent. On the other hand, they saw no objection to suicide. They accepted the New
Testament more literally than did the orthodox; they abstained from oaths, and turned the other
cheek. The persecutors record a case of a man accused of heresy, who defended himself by saying
that he ate meat, lied, swore, and was a good Catholic. 
The stricter precepts of the sect were only to be observed by certain exceptionally holy people
called the "perfected"; the others might eat meat and even marry. 
-447- 

It is interesting to trace the genealogy of these doctrines. They came to Italy and France, by way of
the Crusaders, from a sect called the Bogomiles in Bulgaria; in 1167, when the Cathari held a
council near Toulouse, Bulgarian delegates attended. The Bogomiles, in turn, were the result of a
fusion of Manichæans and Paulicians. The Paulicians were an Armenian sect who rejected infant
baptism, purgatory, the invocation of saints, and the Trinity; they spread gradually into Thrace,
and thence into Bulgaria. The Paulicians were followers of Marcion (ca. A.D. 150), who
considered himself to be following Saint Paul in rejecting the Jewish elements in Christianity, and
who had some affinity with the Gnostics without being one of them. 
The only other popular heresy that I shall consider is that of the Waldenses. These were the
followers of Peter Waldo, an enthusiast who, in 1170, started a "crusade" for observance of the
law of Christ. He gave all his goods to the poor, and founded a society called the "Poor Men of
Lyons," who practised poverty and a strictly virtuous life. At first they had papal approval, but
they inveighed somewhat too forcibly against the immorality of the clergy, and were condemned
by the Council of Verona in 1184. Thereupon they decided that every good man is competent to
preach and expound the Scriptures; they appointed their own ministers, and dispensed with the
services of the Catholic priesthood. They spread to Lombardy, and to Bohemia, where they paved
the way for the Hussites. In the Albigensian persecution, which affected them also, many fled to
Piedmont; it was their persecution in Piedmont in Milton's time that occasioned his sonnet
"Avenge, O Lord, thy slaughtered saints." They survive to this day in remote Alpine valleys and in
the United States. 
All this heresy alarmed the Church, and vigorous measures were taken to suppress it. Innocent III
considered that heretics deserved death, being guilty of treason to Christ. He called upon the King
of France to embark upon a Crusade against the Albigenses, which was done in 1209. It was
conducted with incredible ferocity; after the taking of Carcassonne, especially, there was an
appalling massacre. The ferreting out of heresy had been the business of the bishops, but it
became too onerous to be performed by men who had other duties, and in 1233 Gregory IX
founded the Inquisition, to take over this part of the work of the episcopate. After 1254, those
accused by the Inquisition were not allowed counsel. If condemned, their property 
-448- 

was confiscated--in France, to the crown. When an accused person was found guilty, he was
handed over to the secular arm with a prayer that his life might be spared; but if the secular
authorities failed to burn him, they were liable to be themselves brought before the Inquisition. It
dealt not only with heresy in the ordinary sense, but with sorcery and witchcraft. In Spain, it was
mainly directed against crypto-Jews. Its work was performed mainly by Dominicans and
Franciscans. It never penetrated to Scandinavia or England, but the English were quite ready to
make use of it against Joan of Arc. On the whole, it was very successful; at the outset, it
completely stamped out the Albigensian heresy. 
The Church, in the early thirteenth century, was in danger of a revolt scarcely less formidable than
that of the sixteenth. From this it was saved, very largely, by the rise of the mendicant orders;
Saint Francis and Saint Dominic did much more for orthodoxy than was done by even the most
vigorous popes. 
Saint Francis of Assisi ( 1181 or 1182-1226) was one of the most lovable men known to history.
He was of a well-to-do family, and in his youth was not averse to ordinary gaieties. But one day,
as he was riding by a leper, a sudden impulse of pity led him to dismount and kiss the man. Soon
afterwards, he decided to forgo all worldly goods, and devote his life to preaching and good
works. His father, a respectable business man, was furious, but could not deter him. He soon
gathered a band of followers, all vowed to complete poverty. At first, the Church viewed the
movement with some suspicion; it seemed too like the "Poor Men of Lyons." The first
missionaries whom Saint Francis sent to distant places were taken for heretics, because they
practised poverty instead of (like the monks) only taking a vow which no one regarded as serious.
But Innocent III was shrewd enough to see the value of the movement, if it could be kept within
the bounds of orthodoxy, and in 1209 or 1210 he gave recognition to the new order. Gregory IX,
who was a personal friend of Saint Francis, continued to favour him, while imposing certain rules
which were irksome to the saint's enthusiastic and anarchic impulses. Francis wished to interpret
the vow of poverty in the strictest possible way; he objected to houses or churches for his
followers. They were to beg their bread, and to have no lodging but what chance hospitality
provided. In 1219, he travelled to the East and preached 
-449- 

before the sultan, who received him courteously but remained a Mohammedan. On his return, he
found that the Franciscans had built themselves a house; he was deeply pained, but the Pope
induced or compelled him to give way. After his death, Gregory canonized him but softened his
rule in the article of poverty. 
In the matter of saintliness, Francis has had equals; what makes him unique among saints is his
spontaneous happiness, his universal love, and his gifts as a poet. His goodness appears always
devoid of effort, as though it had no dross to overcome. He loved all living things, not only as a
Christian or a benevolent man, but as a poet. His hymn to the sun, written shortly before his death,
might almost have been written by Akhnaton the sun-worshipper, but not quite-Christianity
informs it, though not very obviously. He felt a duty to lepers, for their sake, not for his; unlike
most Christian saints, he was more interested in the happiness of others than in his own salvation.
He never showed any feeling of superiority, even to the humblest or most wicked. Thomas of
Celano said of him that he was more than a saint among saints; among sinners he was one of
themselves. 
If Satan existed, the future of the order founded by Saint Francis would afford him the most
exquisite gratification. The saint's immediate successor as head of the order, Brother Elias,
wallowed in luxury, and allowed a complete abandonment of poverty. The chief work of the
Franciscans in the years immediately following the death of their founder was as recruiting
sergeants in the bitter and bloody wars of Guelfs and Ghibellines. The Inquisition, founded seven
years after his death, was, in several countries, chiefly conducted by Franciscans. A small
minority, called the Spirituals, remained true to his teaching; many of these were burnt by the
Inquisition for heresy. These men held that Christ and the Apostles owned no property, not even
the clothes they wore; this opinion was condemned as heretical in 1323 by John XXII. The net
result of Saint Francis's life was to create yet one more wealthy and corrupt order, to strengthen
the hierarchy, and to facilitate the persecution of all who excelled in moral earnestness or freedom
of thought. In view of his own aims and character, it is impossible to imagine any more bitterly
ironical outcome. 
Saint Dominic ( 1170-1221) is much less interesting than Saint Francis. He was a Castilian, and
had, like Loyola, a fanatical devotion to orthodoxy. His main purpose was to combat heresy, and
he adopted 
-450- 
