CHAPTER XVIII Knowledge and Perception in Plato 
M OST modern men take it for granted that empirical knowledge is dependent upon, or derived
from, perception. There is, however, in Plato and among philosophers of certain other schools, a
very different doctrine, to the effect that there is nothing worthy to be called "knowledge" to be
derived from the senses, and that the only real knowledge has to do with concepts. In this view, "2
+ 2 = 4" is genuine knowledge, but such a statement as "snow is white" is so full of ambiguity and
uncertainty that it cannot find a place in the philosopher's corpus of truths. 
This view is perhaps traceable to Parmenides, but in its explicit form the philosophic world owes
it to Plato. I propose, in this chapter, to deal only with Plato's criticism of the view that knowledge
is the same thing as perception, which occupies the first half of the Theaetetus. 
This dialogue is concerned to find a definition of "knowledge," but ends without arriving at any
but a negative conclusion; several definitions are proposed and rejected, bur no definition that is
considered satisfactory is suggested. 
The first of the suggested definitions, and the only one that I shall consider, is set forth by
Theaetetus in the words: 
"It seems to me that one who knows something is perceiving the thing that he knows, and, so far
as I can see at present, knowledge is nothing but perception." 
Socrates identifies this doctrine with that of Protagoras, that "man is the measure of all things,"
i.e. that any given thing "is to me such as it appears to me, and is to you such as it appears to you."
Socrates adds: "Perception, then, is always something that is, and, as being knowledge, it is
infallible." 
A large part of the argument that follows is concerned with the 
-149- 

characterization of perception; when once this is completed, it does not take long to prove that
such a thing as perception has turned out to be cannot be knowledge. 
Socrates adds to the doctrine of Protagoras the doctrine of Heraclitus, that everything is always
changing, i.e. that "all the things we are pleased to say 'are' really are in process of becoming."
Plato believes this to be true of objects of sense, but not of the objects of real knowledge.
Throughout the dialogue, however, his positive doctrines remain in the background. 
From the doctrine of Heraclitus, even if it be only applicable to objects of sense, together with the
definition of knowledge as perception, it follows that knowledge is of what becomes, not of what
is. 
There are, at this point, some puzzles of a very elementary character. We are told that, since 6 is
greater than 4 but less than 12, 6 is both great and small, which is a contradiction. Again, Socrates
is now taller than Theaetetus, who is a youth not yet full grown; but in a few years Socrates will
be shorter than Theaetetus. Therefore Socrates is both tall and short. The idea of a relational
proposition seems to have puzzled Plato, as it did most of the great philosophers down to Hegel
(inclusive). These puzzles, however, are not very germane to the argument, and may be ignored. 
Returning to perception, it is regarded as due to an interaction between the object and the sense-
organ, both of which, according to the doctrine of Heraclitus, are always changing, and both of
which, in changing, change the percept. Socrates remarks that when he is well he finds wine
sweet, but when ill, sour. Here it is a change in the percipient that causes the change in the
percept. 
Certain objections to the doctrine of Protagoras are advanced, and some of these are subsequently
withdrawn. It is urged that Protagoras ought equally to have admitted pigs and baboons are
measures of all things, since they also are percipients. Questions are raised as to the validity of
perception in dreams and in madness. It is suggested that, if Protagoras is right, one man knows no
more than another: not only is Protagoras as wise as the gods, but, what is more serious, he is no
wiser than a fool. Further, if one man's judgements are as correct as another's, the people who
judge that Protagoras is mistaken have the same reason to be thought right as he has. 
Socrates undertakes to find an answer to many of these objections, 
-150- 

putting himself, for the moment, in the place of Protagoras. As for dreams, the percepts are true
as percepts. As for the argument about pigs and baboons, this is dismissed as vulgar abuse. As
for the argument that, if each man is the measure of all things, one man is as wise as another,
Socrates suggests, on behalf of Protagoras, a very interesting answer, namely that, while one
judgement cannot be truer than another, it can be better, in the sense of having better
consequences. This suggests pragmatism. * 
This answer, however, though Socrates has invented it, does not satisfy him. He urges, for
example, that when a doctor foretells the course of my illness, he actually knows more of my
future than I do. And when men differ as to what it is wise for the State to decree, the issue
shows that some men had a greater knowledge as to the future than others had. Thus we cannot
escape the conclusion that a wise man is a better measure of things than a fool. 
All these are objections to the doctrine that each man is the measure of all things, and only
indirectly to the doctrine that "knowledge" means "perception," in so far as this doctrine leads
to the other. There is, however, a direct argument, namely that memory must be allowed as well
as perception. This is admitted, and to this extent the proposed definition is amended. 
We come next to criticisms of the doctrine of Heraclitus. This is first pushed to extremes, in
accordance, we are told, with the practice of his disciples among the bright youths of Ephesus.
A thing may change in two ways, by locomotion, and by a change of quality, and the doctrine of
flux is held to state that everything is always changing in both respects. â€ And not only is
everything always undergoing some qualitative change, but everything is always changing all its
qualities--so, we are told, clever people think at Ephesus. This has 
____________________ 
* It was presumably this passage that first suggested to F. C. S. Schiller his admiration of
Protagoras. 
â
€
It seems that neither Plato nor the dynamic youths of Ephesus had noticed that locomotion
is impossible on the extreme Heraclitean doctrine. Motion demands that a given thing A
should be now here, now there; it must remain the same thing while it moves. In the
doctrine that Plato examines there is change of quality and change of place, but not change
of substance. In this respect, modern quantum physics goes further than the most extreme
disciples of Heraclitus went in Plato's time. Plato would have thought this fatal to science,
but it has not proved so. 
-151- 

awkward consequences. We cannot say "this is white," for if it was white when we began
speaking it will have ceased to be white before we end our sentence. We cannot be right in
saying we are seeing a thing, for seeing is perpetually changing into not-seeing. * If everything
is changing in every kind of way, seeing has no right to be called seeing rather than not-seeing,
or perception to be called perception rather than not-perception. And when we say "perception
is knowledge," we might just as well say "perception is not-knowledge." 
What the above argument amounts to is that, whatever else may be in perpetual flux, the
meanings of words must be fixed, at least for a time, since otherwise no assertion is definite,
and no assertion is true rather than false. There must be something more or less constant, if
discourse and knowledge are to be possible. This, I think, should be admitted. But a great deal
of flux is compatible with this admission. 
There is, at this point, a refusal to discuss Parmenides, on the ground that he is too great and
grand. He is a "reverend and awful figure." "There was a sort of depth in him that was
altogether noble." He is "one being whom I respect above all." In these remarks Plato shows his
love for a static universe, and his dislike of the Heraclitean flux which he has been admitting for
the sake of argument. But after this expression of reverence he abstains from developing the
Parmenidean alternative to Heraclitus. 
We now reach Plato's final argument against the identification of knowledge with perception.
He begins by pointing out that we perceive through eyes and ears, rather than with them, and he
goes on to point out that some of our knowledge is not connected with any sense-organ. We can
know, for instance, that sounds and colours are unlike, though no organ of sense can perceive
both. There is no special organ for "existence and non-existence, likeness and unlikeness,
sameness and differences, and also unity and numbers in general." The same applies to
honourable and dishonourable, and good and bad. "The mind contemplates some things through
its own instrumentality, others through the bodily faculties." We perceive hard and soft through
touch, but it is the mind that judges that they exist and that they are contraries. Only the mind
can reach existence, and we can- 
____________________ 
* Compare the advertisement: "That's Shell, that was." 
-152- 
not reach truth if we do not reach existence. It follows that we cannot know things through the
senses alone, since through the senses alone we cannot know that things exist. Therefore
knowledge consists in reflection, not in impressions, and perception is not knowledge, because
it "has no part in apprehending truth, since it has none in apprehending existence."To
disentangle what can be accepted from what must be rejected in this argument against the
identification of knowledge with perception is by no means easy. There are three inter-
connected theses that Plato discusses, namely: 
1. 
Knowledge is perception; 
2. 
Man is the measure of all things; 
3. 
Everything is in a state of flux. 

(1) The first of these, with which alone the argument is primarily concerned, is hardly discussed
on its own account except in the final passage with which we have just been concerned. Here it
is argued that comparison, knowledge of existence, and understanding of number, are essential
to knowledge, but cannot be included in perception since they are not effected through any
sense-organ. The things to be said about these are different. Let us begin with likeness and
unlikeness. 
That two shades of colour, both of which I am seeing, are similar or dissimilar as the case may
be, is something which I, for my part, should accept, not indeed as a "percept," but as a
"judgement of perception." A percept, I should say, is not knowledge, but merely something
that happens, and that belongs equally to the world of physics and to the world of psychology.
We naturally think of perception, as Plato does, as a relation between a percipient and an object:
we say "I see a table." But here "I" and "table" are logical constructions. The core of crude
occurrence is merely certain patches of colour. These are associated with images of touch, they
may cause words, and they may become a source of memories. The percept as filled out with
images of touch becomes an "object," which is supposed physical; the percept as filled out with
words and memories becomes a "perception," which is part of a "subject" and is considered
mental. The percept is just an occurrence, and neither true nor false; the percept as filled out
with words is a judgement, and capable of truth or falsehood. This 
-153- 

judgement I call a "judgement of perception." The proposition "knowledge is perception" must be
interpreted as meaning "knowledge is judgements of perception." It is only in this form that it is
grammatically capable of being correct. 
To return to likeness and unlikeness, it is quite possible, when I perceive two colours
simultaneously, for their likeness or unlikeness to be part of the datum, and to be asserted in a
judgement of perception. Plato's argument that we have no sense-organ for perceiving likeness
and unlikeness ignores the cortex, and assumes that all senseorgans must be at the surface of the
body. 
The argument for including likeness and unlikeness as possible perceptive data is as follows. Let
us assume that we see two shades of colour A and B, and that we judge "A is like B." Let us
assume further, as Plato does, that such a judgement is in general correct, and, in particular, is
correct in the case we are considering. There is, then, a relation of likeness between A and B, and
not merely a judgement on our part asserting likeness. If there were only our judgement, it would
be an arbitrary judgement, incapable of truth or falsehood. Since it obviously is capable of truth or
falsehood, the likeness can subsist between A and B, and cannot be merely something "mental."
The judgement "A is like B" is true (if it is true) in virtue of a "fact," just as much as the
judgement "A is red" or "A is round." The mind is no more involved in the perception of likeness
than in the perception of colour. 
I come now to existence, on which Plato lays great stress. We have, he says, as regards sound and
colour, a thought which includes both at once, namely that they exist. Existence belongs to
everything, and is among the things that the mind apprehends by itself; without reaching
existence, it is impossible to reach truth. 
The argument against Plato here is quite different from that in the case of likeness and unlikeness.
The argument here is that all that Plato says about existence is bad grammar, or rather bad syntax.
This point is important, not only in connection with Plato, but also with other matters such as the
ontological argument for the existence of the Deity. 
Suppose you say to a child "lions exist, but unicorns don't," you can prove your point so far as
lions are concerned by taking him to the Zoo and saying "look, that's a lion." You will not, unless
you are a 
-154- 

philosopher, add: "And you can see that that exists." If, being a philosopher, you do add this,
you are uttering nonsense. To say "lions exist" means "there are lions," i.e. "'x is a lion' is true
for a suitable x." But we cannot say of the suitable x that it "exists"; we can only apply this verb
to a description, complete or incomplete. "Lion" is an incomplete description, because it applies
to many objects: "The largest lion in the Zoo" is complete, because it applies to only one object.
Now suppose that I am looking at a bright red patch. I may say "this is my present percept"; I
may also say "my present percept exists"; but I must not say "this exists," because the word
"exists" is only significant when applied to a description as opposed to a name.* This disposes
of existence as one of the things that the mind is aware of in objects. 
I come now to understanding of numbers. Here there are two very different things to be
considered: on the one hand, the propositions of arithmetic, and on the other hand, empirical
propositions of enumeration. "2 + 2 = 4" is of the former kind; "I have ten fingers" is of the
latter. 
I should agree with Plato that arithmetic, and pure mathematics generally, is not derived from
perception. Pure mathematics consists of tautologies, analogous to "men are men," but usually
more complicated. To know that a mathematical proposition is correct, we do not have to study
the world, but only the meanings of the symbols; and the symbols, when we dispense with
definitions (of which the purpose is merely abbreviation), are found to be such words as "or"
and "not," and "all" and "some," which do not, like "Socrates," denote anything in the actual
world. A mathematical equation asserts that two groups of symbols have the same meaning; and
so long as we confine ourselves to pure mathematics, this meaning must be one that can be
understood without knowing anything about what can be perceived. Mathematical truth,
therefore, is, as Plato contends, independent of perception; but it is truth of a very peculiar sort,
and is concerned only with symbols. 
Propositions of enumeration, such as "I have ten fingers," are in quite a different category, and
are obviously, at least in part, dependent 
____________________ 
* On this subject see the last chapter of the present work. 
-155- 

on perception. Clearly the concept "finger" is abstracted from perception; but how about the
concept "ten"? Here we may seem to have arrived at a true universal or Platonic idea. We cannot
say that "ten" is abstracted from perception, for any percept which can be viewed as ten of some
kind of thing can equally well be viewed otherwise. Suppose I give the name "digitary" to all the
fingers of one hand taken together; then I can say "I have two digitaries," and this describes the
same fact of perception as I formerly described by the help of the number ten. Thus in the
statement "I have ten fingers" perception plays a smaller part, and conception a larger part, than in
such a statement as "this is red." The matter, however, is only one of degree. 
The complete answer, as regards propositions in which the word "ten" occurs, is that, when these
propositions are correctly analysed, they are found to contain no constituent corresponding to the
word "ten." To explain this in the case of such a large number as ten would be complicated; let us,
therefore, substitute "I have two hands." This means: 
"There is an a such that there is a b such that a and b are not identical and whatever x may be, 'x is
a hand of mine' is true when, and only when, x is a or x is b." 
Here the word "two" does not occur. It is true that two letters a and b occur, but we do not need to 
know that they are two, any more than we need to know that they are black, or white, or whatever
colour they may happen to be. 
Thus numbers are, in a certain precise sense, formal. The facts which verify various propositions
asserting that various collections each have two members, have in common, not a constituent, but
a form. In this they differ from propositions about the Statue of Liberty, or the moon, or George
Washington. Such propositions refer to a particular portion of space-time; it is this that is in
common between all the statements that can be made about the Statue of Liberty. But there is
nothing in common among propositions "there are two soand-so's" except a common form. The
relation of the symbol "two" to the meaning of a proposition in which it occurs is far more
complicated than the relation of the symbol "red" to the meaning of a proposition in which it
occurs. We may say, in a certain sense, that the symbol "two" means nothing, for, when it occurs
in a true state- 
-156- 

ment, there is no corresponding constituent in the meaning of the statement. We may continue, if
we like, to say that numbers are eternal, immutable, and so on, but we must add that they are
logical fictions. 
There is a further point. Concerning sound and colour, Plato says "both together are two, and each
of them is one." We have considered the two; now we must consider the one. There is here a
mistake very analogous to that concerning existence. The predicate "one" is not applicable to
things, but only to unit classes. We can say "the earth has one satellite," but it is a syntactical error
to say "the moon is one." For what can such an assertion mean? You may just as well say "the
moon is many," since it has many parts. To say "the earth has one satellite" is to give a property of
the concept "earth's satellite," namely the following property: 
"There is a c such that 'x is a satellite of the earth' is true when, and only when, x is c." 
This is an astronomical truth; but if, for "a satellite of the earth," you substitute "the moon" or any
other proper name, the result is either meaningless or a mere tautology. "One," therefore, is a
property of certain concepts, just as "ten" is a property of the concept "my finger." But to argue
"the earth has one satellite, namely the moon, therefore the moon is one" is as bad as to argue "the
Apostles were twelve; Peter was an apostle; therefore Peter was twelve," which would be valid if
for "twelve" we substituted "white." 
The above considerations have shown that, while there is a formal kind of knowledge, namely
logic and mathematics, which is not derived from perception, Plato's arguments as regards all
other knowledge are fallacious. This does not, of course, prove that his conclusion is false; it
proves only that he has given no valid reason for supposing it true. 
(2) I come now to the position of Protagoras, that man is the measure of all things, or, as it is
interpreted, that each man is the measure of all things. Here it is essential to decide the level upon
which the discussion is to proceed. It is obvious that, to begin with, we must distinguish between
percepts and inferences. Among percepts, each man is inevitably confined to his own; what he
knows of the percepts of others he knows by inference from his own percepts in hearing and
reading. The percepts of dreamers and madmen, as 
-157- 

percepts, are just as good as those of others; the only objection to them is that, as their context is
unusual, they are apt to give rise to fallacious inferences. 
But how about inferences? Are they equally personal and private? In a sense, we must admit that
they are. What I am to believe, I must believe because of some reason that appeals to me. It is true
that my reason may be some one else's assertion, but that may be a perfectly adequate reason--for
instance, if I am a judge listening to evidence. And however Protagorean I may be, it is reasonable
to accept the opinion of an accountant about a set of figures in preference to my own, for I may
have repeatedly found that if, at first, I disagree with him, a little more care shows me that he was
right. In this sense I may admit that another man is wiser than I am. The Protagorean position,
rightly interpreted, does not involve the view that I never make mistakes, but only that the
evidence of my mistakes must appear to me. My past self can be judged just as another person can
be judged. But all this presupposes that, as regards inferences as opposed to percepts, there is
some impersonal standard of correctness. If any inference that I happen to draw is just as good as
any other, then the intellectual anarchy that Plato deduces from Protagoras does in fact follow. On
this point, therefore, which is an important one, Plato seems to be in the right. But the empiricist
would say that perceptions are the test of correctness in inference in empirical material. 
(3) The doctrine of universal flux is caricatured by Plato, and it is difficult to suppose that any one
ever held it in the extreme form that he gives to it. Let us suppose, for example, that the colours
we see are continually changing. Such a word as "red" applies to many shades of colour, and if we
say "I see red," there is no reason why this should not remain true throughout the time that it takes
to say it. Plato gets his results by applying to processes of continuous change such logical
oppositions as perceiving and not-perceiving, knowing and not-knowing. Such oppositions,
however, are not suitable for describing such processes. Suppose, on a foggy day, you watch a
man walking away from you along a road: he grows dimmer and dimmer, and there comes a
moment when you are sure that you no longer see him, but there is an intermediate period of
doubt. Logical oppositions have been invented for our convenience, but continuous change
requires a quantitative apparatus, the possibility of which Plato 
-158- 
