crats, as the opponents of tyranny, were able to recommend themselves to the democracy. Until
the fall of Pericles, democratic processes gave power to the aristocracy, as in nineteenth century
England. But towards the end of his life the leaders of the Athenian democracy began to demand a
larger share of political power. At the same time, his imperialist policy, with which the economic
prosperity of Athens was bound up, caused increasing friction with Sparta, leading at last to the
Peloponnesian War ( 431-404), in which Athens was completely defeated. 
In spite of political collapse, the prestige of Athens survived, and throughout almost a millennium
philosophy was centred there. Alexandria eclipsed Athens in mathematics and science, but
Aristotle and Plato had made Athens philosophically supreme. The Academy, where Plato had
taught, survived all other schools, and persisted, as an island of paganism, for two centuries after
the conversion of the Roman Empire to Christianity. At last, in A.D. 529, it was closed by
Justinian because of his religious bigotry, and the Dark Ages descended upon Europe. 
CHAPTER VIII Anaxagoras 
THE philosopher Anaxagoras, though not the equal of Pythagoras, Heraclitus, or Parmenides, has
nevertheless a considerable historical importance. He was an Ionian, and carried on the scientific,
rationalist tradition of Ionia. He was the first to introduce philosophy to the Athenians, and the
first to suggest mind as the primary cause of physical changes. 
He was born at Clazomenae, in Ionia, about the year 500 B.C., but he spent about thirty years of
his life in Athens, approximately from 462 to 432 B.C. He was probably induced to come by
Pericles, who was bent on civilizing his fellow-townsmen. Perhaps Aspasia, who 
-61- 

came from Miletus, introduced him to Pericles. Plato, in the Phaedrus, says: 
Pericles "fell in, it seems with Anaxagoras, who was a scientific man; and satiating himself with
the theory of things on high, and having attained to a knowledge of the true nature of intellect and
folly, which were just what the discourses of Anaxagoras were mainly about, he drew from that
source whatever was of a nature to further him in the art of speech." 
It is said that Anaxagoras also influenced Euripides, but this is more doubtful. 
The citizens of Athens, like those of other cities in other ages and continents, showed a certain
hostility to those who attempted to introduce a higher level of culture than that to which they were
accustomed. When Pericles was growing old, his opponents began a campaign against him by
attacking his friends. They accused Pheidias of embezzling some of the gold that was to be
employed on his statues. They passed a law permitting impeachment of those who did not practise
religion and taught theories about "the things on high." Under this law, they prosecuted
Anaxagoras, who was accused of teaching that the sun was a red-hot stone and the moon was
earth. (The same accusation was repeated by the prosecutors of Socrates, who made fun of them
for being out of date.) What happened is not certain, except that he had to leave Athens. It seems
probable that Pericles got him out of prison and managed to get him away. He returned to Ionia,
where he founded a school. In accordance with his will, the anniversary of his death was kept as a
schoolchildrens' holiday. 
Anaxagoras held that everything is infinitely divisible, and that even the smallest portion of matter
contains some of each element. Things appear to be that of which they contain most. Thus, for
example, everything contains some fire, but we only call it fire if that element preponderates. Like
Empedocles, he argues against the void, saying that the clepsydra or an inflated skin shows that
there. is air where there seems to be nothing. 
He differed from his predecessors in regarding mind (nous) as a substance which enters into the
composition of living things, and distinguishes them from dead matter. In everything, he says,
there 
-62- 

is a portion of everything except mind, and some things contain mind also. Mind has power over
all things that have life; it is infinite and self-ruled, and is mixed with nothing. Except as regards
mind, everything, however small, contains portions of all opposites, such as hot and cold, white
and black. He maintained that snow is black (in part). 
Mind is the source of all motion. It causes a rotation, which is gradually spreading throughout the
world, and is causing the lightest things to go to the circumference, and the heaviest to fall
towards the centre. Mind is uniform, and is just as good in animals as in man. Man's apparent
superiority is due to the fact that he has hands; all seeming differences of intelligence are really
due to bodily differences. 
Both Aristotle and the Platonic Socrates complain that Anaxagoras, after introducing mind, makes
very little use of it. Aristotle points out that he only introduces mind as a cause when he knows no
other. Whenever he can, he gives a mechanical explanation. He rejected necessity and chance as
giving the origins of things; nevertheless, there was no "Providence" in his cosmology. He does
not seem to have thought much about ethics or religion; probably he was an atheist, as his
prosecutors maintained. All his predecessors influenced him, except Pythagoras. The influence of
Parmenides was the same in his case as in that of Empedocles. 
In science he had great merit. It was he who first explained that the moon shines by reflected light,
though there is a cryptic fragment in Parmenides suggesting that he also knew this. Anaxagoras
gave the correct theory of eclipses, and knew that the moon is below the sun. The sun and stars, he
said, are fiery stones, but we do not feel the heat of the stars because they are too distant. The sun
is larger than the Peloponnesus. The moon has mountains, and (he thought) inhabitants. 
Anaxagoras is said to have been of the school of Anaximenes; certainly he kept alive the
rationalist and scientific tradition of the Ionians. One does not find in him the ethical and religious
preoccupations which, passing from the Pythagoreans to Socrates and from Socrates to Plato,
brought an obscurantist bias into Greek philosophy. He is not quite in the first rank, but he is
important as the first to bring philosophy to Athens, and as one of the influences that helped to
form Socrates. 
-63- 
