CHAPTER XII The Influence of Sparta 
TO understand Plato, and indeed many later philosophers, it is necessary to know something of
Sparta. Sparta had a double effect on Greek thought: through the reality, and through the myth.
Each is important. The reality enabled the Spartans to defeat Athens in war; the myth influenced
Plato's political theory, and that of countless subsequent writers. The myth, fully developed, is
to be found in Plutarch Life of Lycurgus; the ideals that it favours have had a great part in
framing the doctrines of Rousseau, Nietzsche, and National Socialism. * The myth is of even
more importance, historically, than the reality; nevertheless, we will begin with the latter. For
the reality was the source of the myth. 
Laconia, or Lacedaemon, of which Sparta was the capital, occupied the south-east of the
Peloponnesus. The Spartans, who were the ruling race, had conquered the country at the time of
the Dorian invasion from the north, and had reduced the population that they found there to the
condition of serfs. These serfs were called helots. In historical times, all the land belonged to
the Spartans, who, however, were forbidden by law and custom to cultivate it themselves, both
on the ground that such labour was degrading, and in order that they might always be free for
military service. The serfs were not bought and sold, but remained attached to the land, which
was divided into lots, one or more for each adult male Spartan. These lots, like the helots, could
not be bought or sold, and passed, by law, from father to son. (They could, however, be
bequeathed.) The landowner received from the helot who cultivated the lot seventy medimni
(about 105 bushels) of grain for himself, twelve for his wife, and a stated 
____________________ 
* Not to mention Dr. Thomas Arnold and the English public schools. 
-94- 

portion of wine and fruit annually. * Anything beyond this amount was the property of the
helot. The helots were Greeks, like the Spartans, and bitterly resented their servile condition.
When they could, they rebelled. The Spartans had a body of secret police to deal with this
danger, but to supplement this precaution they had another: once a year, they declared war on
the helots, so that their young men could kill any who seemed insubordinate without incurring
the legal guilt of homicide. Helots could be emancipated by the state, but not by their masters;
they were emancipated, rather rarely, for exceptional bravery in battle. 
At some time during the eighth century B.C. the Spartans conquered the neighbouring country
of Messenia, and reduced most of its inhabitants to the condition of helots. There had been a
lack of Lebensraum in Sparta, but the new territory, for a time, removed this source of
discontent. 
Lots were for the common run of Spartans; the aristocracy had estates of their own, whereas the
lots were portions of common land assigned by the state. 
The free inhabitants of other parts of Laconia, called "perioeci," had no share of political power.
The sole business of a Spartan citizen was war, to which he was trained from birth. Sickly
children were exposed after inspection by the heads of the tribe; only those judged vigorous
were allowed to be reared. Up to the age of twenty, all the boys were trained in one big school;
the purpose of the training was to make them hardy, indifferent to pain, and submissive to
discipline. There was no nonsense about cultural or scientific education; the sole aim was to
produce good soldiers, wholly devoted to the state. 
At the age of twenty, actual military service began. Marriage was permitted to any one over the
age of twenty, but until the age of thirty a man had to live in the "men's house," and had to
manage his marriage as if it were an illicit and secret affair. After thirty, he was a full-fledged
citizen. Every citizen belonged to a mess, and dined with the other members; he had to make a
contribution in kind from the produce of his lot. It was the theory of the state that no Spartan
citizen should be destitute, and none should be rich. Each was ex- 
____________________ 
* Bury, History of Greece, I, p. 138. It seems that Spartan men ate nearly six times as much
as their wives. 
-95- 

pected to live on the produce of his lot, which he could not alienate except by free gift. None was
allowed to own gold or silver, and the money was made of iron. Spartan simplicity became
proverbial. 
The position of women in Sparta was peculiar. They were not secluded, like respectable women
elsewhere in Greece. Girls went through the same physical training as was given to boys; what is
more remarkable, boys and girls did their gymnastics together, all being naked. It was desired (I
quote Plutarch Lycurgus in North's translation): 
that the maidens should harden their bodies with exercise of running, wrestling, throw the bar, and
casting the dart, to the end that the fruit wherewith they might be afterwards conceived, taking
nourishment of a strong and lusty body, should shoot out and spread the better: and that they by
gathering strength thus by exercises, should more easily away with the pains of child bearing. . . .
And though the maidens did show themselves thus naked openly, yet was there no dishonesty seen
nor offered, but all this sport was full of play and toys, without any youthful part or wantonness. 
Men who would not marry were made "infamous by law," and compelled, even in the coldest
weather, to walk up and down naked outside the place where the young people were doing their
exercises and dances. 
Women were not allowed to exhibit any emotion not profitable to the State. They might display
contempt for a coward, and would be praised if he were their son; but they might not show grief if
their new-born child was condemned to death as a weakling, or if their sons were killed in battle.
They were considered, by other Greeks, exceptionally chaste; at the same time, a childless married
woman would raise no objection if the state ordered her to find out whether some other man
would be more successful than her husband in begetting citizens. Children were encouraged by
legislation. According to Aristotle, the father of three sons was exempt from military service, and
the father of four from all the burdens of the state. 
The constitution of Sparta was complicated. There were two kings, belonging to two different
families, and succeeding by heredity. One or other of the kings commanded army in time of war,
but in time of peace their powers were limited. At communal feasts they 
-96- 

got twice as much to eat as any one else, and there was general mourning when one of them
died. They were members of the Council of Elders, a body consisting of thirty men (including
the kings); the other twenty-eight must be over sixty, and were chosen for life by the whole
body of the citizens, but only from aristocratic families. The Council tried criminal cases, and
prepared matters which were to come before the Assembly. This body (the Assembly) consisted
of all the citizens; it could not initiate anything, but could vote yes or no to any proposal
brought before it. No law could be enacted without its consent. But its consent, though
necessary, was not sufficient; the elders and magistrates must proclaim the decision before it
became valid. 
In addition to the kings, the Council of Elders, and the Assembly, there was a fourth branch of
the government, peculiar to Sparta. This was the five ephors. These were chosen out of the
whole body of the citizens, by a method which Aristotle says was "too childish," and which
Bury says was virtually by lot. They were a "democratic" element in the constitution, *
apparently intended to balance the kings. Every month the kings swore to uphold the
constitution, and the ephors then swore to uphold the kings so long as they remained true to
their oath. When either king went on a warlike expedition, two ephors accompanied him to
watch over his behaviour. The ephors were the supreme civil court, but over the kings they had
criminal jurisdiction. 
The Spartan constitution was supposed, in later antiquity, to have been due to a legislator
named Lycurgus, who was said to have promulgated his laws in 885 B.C. In fact, the Spartan
system grew up gradually, and Lycurgus was a mythical person, originally a god. His name
meant "wolf-repeller," and his origin was Arcadian. 
Sparta aroused among the other Greeks an admiration which is to us somewhat surprising.
Originally, it had been much less different from other Greek cities than it became later; in early
days it produced poets and artists as good as those elsewhere. But about the seventh century
B.C., or perhaps even later, its constitution (falsely attributed to Lycurgus) crystallized into the
form we have been considering; 
____________________ 
* In speaking of "democratic" elements in the Spartan constitution, one must of course
remember that the citizens as a whole were a ruling class fiercely tyrannizing over the
helots, and allowing no power to the perioeci. 
-97- 

everything else was sacrificed to success in war, and Sparta ceased to have any part whatever in
what Greece contributed to the civilization of the world. To us, the Spartan state appears as a
model, in miniature, of the state that the Nazis would establish if victorious. To the Greeks it
seemed otherwise. As Bury says: 
A stranger from Athens or Miletus in the fifth century visiting the straggling villages which
formed her unwalled unpretentious city must have had a feeling of being transported into an age
long past, when men were braver, better and simpler, unspoiled by wealth, undisturbed by
ideas. To a philosopher, like Plato, speculating in political science, the Spartan State seemed the
nearest approach to the ideal. The ordinary Greek looked upon it as a structure of severe and
simple beauty, a Dorian city stately as a Dorian temple, far nobler than his own abode but not so
comfortable to dwell in. * 
One reason for the admiration felt for Sparta by other Greeks was its stability. All other Greek
cities had revolutions, but the Spartan constitution remained unchanged for centuries, except for
a gradual increase in the powers of the ephors, which occurred by legal means, without
violence. 
It cannot be denied that, for a long period, the Spartans were successful in their main purpose,
the creation of a race of invincible warriors. The battle of Thermopylae ( 480 B.C.), though
technically a defeat, is perhaps the best example of their valour. Thermopylae was a narrow
pass through the mountains, where it was hoped that the Persian army could be held. Three
hundred Spartans, with auxiliaries, repulsed all frontal attacks. But at last the Persians
discovered a detour through the hills, and succeeded in attacking the Greeks on both sides at
once. Every single Spartan was killed at his post. Two men had been absent on sick leave,
suffering from a disease of the eyes amounting almost to temporary blindness. One of them
insisted on being led by his helot to the battle, where he perished; the other, Aristodemus,
decided that he was too ill to fight, and remained absent. When he returned to Sparta, no one
would speak to him; he was called "the coward Aristodemus." A year later, he wiped out his
disgrace by dying bravely at the battle of Plataea, where the Spartans were victorious. 
____________________ 
* History of Greece, Vol. I, p. 141. 
-98- 

After the war, the Spartans erected a memorial on the battlefield of Thermopylae, saying only:
"Stranger, tell the Lacedaemonians that we lie here, in obedience to their orders." 
For a long time, the Spartans proved themselves invincible on land. They retained their
supremacy until the year 371 B.C., when they were defeated by the Thebans at the battle of
Leuctra. This was the end of their military greatness. 
Apart from war, the reality of Sparta was never quite the same as the theory. Herodotus, who
lived at its great period, remarks, surprisingly, that no Spartan could resist a bribe. This was in
spite of the fact that contempt for riches and love of the simple life was one of the main things
inculcated in Spartan education. We are told that the Spartan women were chaste, yet it
happened several times that a reputed heir to the kingship was set aside on the ground of not
being the son of his mother's husband. We are told that the Spartans were inflexibly patriotic,
yet the king Pausanias, the victor of Plataea, ended as a traitor in the pay of Xerxes. Apart from
such flagrant matters, the policy of Sparta was always petty and provincial. When Athens
liberated the Greeks of Asia Minor and the adjacent islands from the Persians, Sparta held
aloof; so long as the Peloponnesus was deemed safe, the fate of other Greeks was a matter of
indifference. Every attempt at a confederation of the Hellenic world was defeated by Spartan
particularism. 
Aristotle, who lived after the downfall of Sparta, gives a very hostile account of its constitution.
* What he says is so different from what other people say that it is difficult to believe he is
speaking of the same place, e.g. "The legislator wanted to make the whole state hardy and
temperate, and he has carried out his intention in the case of men, but he has neglected the
women, who live in every sort of intemperance and luxury. The consequence is that in such a
state wealth is too highly valued, especially if the citizens fall under the dominion of their
wives, after the manner of most warlike races. . . . Even in regard to courage, which is of no use
in daily life, and is needed only in war, the influence of the Lacedaemonian women has been
most mischievous. . . . This license of the Lacedaemonian women existed from the earliest
times, and was only what might be 
____________________ 
* Politics, Vol. II, 9 ( 1269b-70a). 
-99- 

expected. For . . . when Lycurgus, as tradition says, wanted to bring the women under his laws,
they resisted, and he gave up the attempt." 
He goes on to accuse Spartans of avarice, which he attributes to the unequal distribution of
property. Although lots cannot be sold, he says, they can be given or bequeathed. Two-fifths of all
the land, he adds, belongs to women. The consequence is a great diminution in the number of
citizens: it is said that once there were ten thousand, but at the time of the defeat by Thebes there
were less than one thousand. 
Aristotle criticizes every point of the Spartan constitution. He says that the ephors are often very
poor, and therefore easy to bribe; and their power is so great that even kings are compelled to
court them, so that the constitution has been turned into a democracy. The ephors, we are told,
have too much licence, and live in a manner contrary to the spirit of the constitution, while the
strictness in relation to ordinary citizens is so intolerable that they take refuge in the secret illegal
indulgence of sensual pleasures. 
Aristotle wrote when Sparta was decadent, but on some points he expressly says that the evil he is
mentioning has existed from early times. His tone is so dry and realistic that it is difficult to
disbelieve him, and it is in line with all modern experience of the results of excessive severity in
the laws. But it was not Aristotle's Sparta that persisted in men's imaginations; it was the mythical
Sparta of Plutarch and the philosophic idealization of Sparta in Plato Republic. Century after
century, young men read these works, and were fired with the ambition to become Lycurguses or
philosopher-kings. The resulting union of idealism and love of power has led men astray over and
over again, and is still doing so in the present day. 
The myth of Sparta, for medieval and modern readers, was mainly fixed by Plutarch. When he
wrote, Sparta belonged to the romantic past; its great period was as far removed from his time as
Columbus is from ours. What he says must be treated with great caution by the historian of
institutions, but by the historian of myth it is of the utmost importance. Greece has influenced the
world, always, through its effect on men's imaginations, ideals, and hopes, not directly through
political power. Rome made roads which largely still survive, and laws which are the source of
many modern legal codes, but it was the armies of Rome that made these things important. The
Greeks, 
-100- 

though admirable fighters, made no conquests, because they expended their military fury mainly
on each other. It was left to the semibarbarian Alexander to spread Hellenism throughout the
Near East, and to make Greek the literary language in Egypt and Syria and the inland parts of
Asia Minor. The Greeks could never have accomplished this task, not for lack of military force,
but owing to their incapacity for political cohesion. The political vehicles of Hellenism have
always been non-Hellenic; but it was the Greek genius that so inspired alien nations as to cause
them to spread the culture of those whom they had conquered. 
What is important to the historian of the world is not the petty wars between Greek cities, or the
sordid squabbles for party ascendancy, but the memories retained by mankind when the brief
episode was ended--like the recollection of a brilliant sunrise in the Alps, while the mountaineer
struggles through an arduous day of wind and snow. These memories, as they gradually faded,
left in men's minds the images of certain peaks that had shone with peculiar brightness in the
early light, keeping alive the knowledge that behind the clouds a splendour still survived, and
might at any moment become manifest. Of these, Plato was the most important in early
Christianity, Aristotle in the medieval Church; but when, after the Renaissance, men began to
value political freedom, it was above all to Plutarch that they turned. He influenced profoundly
the English and French liberals of the eighteenth century, and the founders of the United States;
he influenced the romantic movement in Germany, and has continued, mainly by indirect
channels, to influence German thought down to the present day. In some ways his influence was
good, in some bad; as regards Lycurgus and Sparta, it was bad. What he has to say about
Lycurgus is important, and I shall give a brief account of it, even at the cost of some repetition. 
Lycurgus--so Plutarch says--having resolved to give laws to Sparta, travelled widely in order to
study different institutions. He liked the laws of Crete, which were "very straight and severe," *
but disliked those of Ionia, where there were "superfluities and vanities." In Egypt he learned
the advantage of separating the soldiers from the rest of the people, and afterwards, having
returned from his travels, "brought 
____________________ 
* In quoting Plutarch I use North's translation. 
-101- 

the practice of it into Sparta: where setting the merchants, artificers, and labourers every one a part
by themselves, he did establish a noble Commonwealth." He made an equal division of lands
among all the citizens of Sparta, in order to "banish out of the city all insolvency, envy,
covetousness, and deliciousness, and also all riches and poverty." He forbade gold and silver
money, allowing only iron coinage, of so little value that "to lay up thereof the value of ten minas,
it would have occupied a whole cellar in a house." By this means he banished "all superfluous and
unprofitable sciences," since there was not enough money to pay their practitioners; and by the
same law he made all external commerce impossible. Rhetoricians, panders, and jewellers, not
liking the iron money, avoided Sparta. He next ordained that all the citizens should eat together,
and all should have the same food. 
Lycurgus, like other reformers, thought the education of children "the chiefest and greatest matter,
that a reformer of laws should establish"; and like all who aim chiefly at military power, he was
anxious to keep up the birth rate. The "plays, sports, and dances the maids did naked before young
men, were provocations to draw and allure the young men to marry: not as persuaded by
geometrical reasons, as saith Plato, but brought to it by liking, and of very love." The habit of
treating a marriage, for the first few years, as if it were a clandestine affair, "continued in both
parties a still burning love, and a new desire of the one to the other"--such, at least, is the opinion
of Plutarch. He goes on to explain that a man was not thought ill of if, being old and having a
young wife, he allowed a younger man to have children by her. "It was lawful also for an honest
man that loved another man's wife . . . to intreat her husband to suffer him to lie with her, and that
he might also plough in that lusty ground, and cast abroad the seed of well-favoured children."
There was to be no foolish jealousy, for "Lycurgus did not like that children should be private to
any men, but that they should be common to the common weal: by which reason he would also,
that such as should become citizens should not be begotten of every man, but of the most honest
men only." He goes on to explain that this is the principle that farmers apply to their live-stock. 
When a child was born, the father brought him before the elders of his family to be examined: if
he was healthy, he was given back to the father to be reared; if not, he was thrown into a deep pit
of water. 
-102- 

Children, from the first, were subjected to a severe hardening process, in some respects good--for
example, they were not put in swaddling clothes. At the age of seven, boys were taken away from
home and put in a boarding school, where they were divided into companies, each under the
orders of one of their number, chosen for sense and courage. "Touching learning, they had as
much as served their turn: for the rest of their time they spent in learning how to obey, to away
with pain, to endure labour, to overcome still in fight." They played naked together most of the
time; after twelve years old, they wore no coats; they were always "nasty and sluttish," and they
never bathed except on certain days in the year. They slept on beds of straw, which in winter they
mixed with thistle. They were taught to steal, and were punished if caught--not for stealing, but
for stupidity. 
Homosexual love, both male and female, was a recognized custom in Sparta, and had an
acknowledged part in the education of adolescent boys. A boy's lover suffered credit or discredit
by the boy's actions; Plutarch states that once, when a boy cried out because he was hurt in
fighting, his lover was fined for the boy's cowardice. 
There was little liberty at any stage in the life of a Spartan. 
Their discipline and order of life continued still, after they were full grown men. For it was not
lawful for any man to live as he listed, but they were within their city, as if they had been in a
camp, where every man knoweth what allowance he hath to live withal, and what business he hath
else to do in his calling. To be short, they were all of this mind, that they were not born to serve
themselves, but to serve their country. . . . One of the best and happiest things which Lycurgus
ever brought into his city, was the great rest and leisure which he made his citizens to have, only
forbidding them that they should not profess any vile or base occupation: and they needed not also
to be careful to get great riches, in a place where goods were nothing profitable nor esteemed. For
the Helots, which were bond men made by the wars, did till their grounds, and yielded them a
certain revenue every year. 
Plutarch goes on to tell a story of an Athenian condemned for idleness, upon hearing of which a
Spartan exclaimed: "Show me the man condemned for living nobly and like a gentleman." 
-103- 
