real contingency, then his condemnation of intellect, and finally his account of the relations of
mind and matter. 
Of course a large part of Bergson's philosophy, probably the part to which most of its popularity is
due, does not depend upon argument, and cannot be upset by argument. His imaginative picture of
the world, regarded as a poetic effort, is in the main not capable of either proof or disproof.
Shakespeare says life's but a walking shadow, Shelley says it is like a dome of many-coloured
glass, Bergson says it is a shell which bursts into parts that are again shells. If you like Bergson's
image better, it is just as legitimate. 
The good which Bergson hopes to see realized in the world is action for the sake of action. All
pure contemplation he calls "dreaming," and condemns by a whole series of uncomplimentary
epithets: static, Platonic, mathematical, logical, intellectual. Those who desire some prevision of
the end which action is to achieve are told that an end foreseen would be nothing new, because
desire, like memory, is identified with its object. Thus we are condemned, in action, to be the
blind slaves of instinct: the life-force pushes us on from behind, restlessly and unceasingly. There
is no room in this philosophy for the moment of contemplative insight when, rising above the
animal life, we become conscious of the greater ends that redeem man from the life of the brutes.
Those to whom activity without purpose seems a sufficient good will find in Bergson's books a
pleasing picture of the universe. But those to whom action, if it is to be of any value, must be
inspired by some vision, by some imaginative foreshadowing of a world less painful, less unjust,
less full of strife than the world of our every-day life, those, in a word, whose action is built on
contemplation, will find in this philosophy nothing of what they seek, and will not regret that there
is no reason to think it true. 
-810- 
CHAPTER XXIX WILLIAM JAMES 
WILLIAM JAMES ( 1842-1910)was primarily a psychologist, but was important in philosophy on
two accounts: he invented the. doctrine which he called "radical empiricism," and he was one of
the three protagonists of the theory called "pragmatism" or "instrumentalism." In later life he was,
as he deserved to be, the recognized leader of American philosophy. He was led by the study of
medicine to the consideration of psychology; his great book on the subject, published in 1890, had
the highest possible excellence. I shall not, however, deal with it, since it was a contribution to
science rather than to philosophy. 
There were two sides to William James's philosophical interests, one scientific, the other
religious. On the scientific side, the study of medicine had given his thoughts a tendency towards
materialism, which, however, was held in check by his religious emotions. His religious feelings
were very Protestant, very democratic, and very full of a warmth of human kindness. He refused
altogether to follow his brother Henry into fastidious snobbishness. "The prince of darkness," he
said, "may be a gentleman, as we are told he is, but whatever the God of earth and heaven is, he
can surely be no gentleman." This is a very characteristic pronouncement. 
His warm-heartedness and his delightful humour caused him to be almost universally beloved.
The only man I know of who did not feel any affection for him was Santayana, whose doctor's
thesis William James had described as "the perfection of rottenness." There was between these
two men a temperamental opposition which nothing could have overcome. Santayana also liked
religion, but in a very different way. He liked it aesthetically and historically, not as a help
towards a moral life; as was natural, he greatly preferred Catholicism to Protestantism. He did not
intellectually accept any of the Chrisdm 
-811- 

dogmas, but he was content that others should believe them, and himself appreciated what he
regarded as the Christian myth. To James, such an attitude could not but appear immoral. He
retained from his Puritan ancestry a deep-seated belief that what is of most importance is good
conduct, and his democratic feeling made him unable to acquiesce in the notion of one truth for
philosophers and another for the vulgar. The temperamental opposition between Protestant and
Catholic persists among the unorthodox; Santayana was a Catholic free-thinker, William James a
Protestant, however heretical. 
James doctrine of radical empiricism was first published in 1904, in an essay called "Does
'Consciousness' Exist?" The main purpose of this essay was to deny that the subject-object
relation is fundamental. It had, until then, been taken for granted by philosophers that there is a
kind of occurrence called "knowing," in which one entity, the knower or subject, is aware of
another, the thing known or the object. The knower was regarded as a mind or soul; the object
known might be a material object, an eternal essence, another mind, or, in self-consciousness,
identical with the knower. Almost everything in accepted philosophy was bound up with the
dualism of subject and object. The distinction of mind and matter, the contemplative ideal, and the
traditional notion of "truth," all need to be radically reconsidered if the distinction of subject and
object is not accepted as fundamental. 
For my part, I am convinced that James was right on this matter, and would, on this ground alone,
deserve a high place among philosophers. I had thought otherwise until he, and those who agreed
with him, persuaded me of the truth of his doctrine. But let us proceed to his arguments. 
Consciousness, he says, "is the name of a nonentity, and has no right to a place among first
principles. Those who still cling to it are clinging to a mere echo, the faint rumour left behind by
the disappearing 'soul' upon the air of philosophy." There is, he continues, "no aboriginal stuff or
quality of being, contrasted with that of which material objects are made, out of which our
thoughts of them are made." He explains that he is not denying that our thoughts perform a
function which is that of knowing, and that this function may be called "being conscious." What
he is denying might be put crudely as the view that consciousness is a "thing." He holds that there
is "only one primal stuff 
-812- 

or material," out of which everything in the world is composed. This stuff he calls "pure
experience." Knowing, he says, is a particular sort of relation between two portions of pure
experience. The subjectobject relation is derivative: "experience, I believe, has no such inner
duplicity." A given undivided portion of experience can be in one context a knower, and in
another something known. 
He defines "pure experience" as "the immediate flux of life which furnishes the material to our
later reflection." 
It will be seen that this doctrine abolishes the distinction between mind and matter, if regarded as
a distinction between two different kinds of what James calls "stuff." Accordingly those who
agree with James in this matter advocate what they call "neutral monism," according to which the
material of which the world is constructed is neither mind nor matter, but something anterior to
both. James himself did not develop this implication of his theory; on the contrary, his use of the
phrase "pure experience" points to a perhaps unconscious Berkeleian idealism. The word
"experience" is one often used by philosophers, but seldom defined. Let us consider for a moment
what it can mean. 
Common sense holds that many things which occur are not "experienced," for instance, events on
the invisible side of the moon. Berkeley and Hegel, for different reasons, both denied this, and
maintained that what is not experienced is nothing. Their arguments are now held by most
philosophers to be invalid--rightly, in my opinion. If we are to adhere to the view that the "stuff"
of the world is "experience," we shall find it necessary to invent elaborate and unplausible
explanations of what we mean by such things as the invisible side of the moon. And unless we are
able to infer things not experienced from things experienced, we shall have difficulty in finding
grounds for belief in the existence of anything except ourselves. James, it is true, denies this, but
his reasons are not very convincing. 
What do we mean by "experience"? The best way to find an answer is to ask: What is the
difference between an event which is not experienced and one which is? Rain seen or felt to be
falling is experienced, but rain falling in the desert where there is no living thing is not
experienced. Thus we arrive at our first point: there is no experience except where there is life.
But experience is not coextensive with life. Many things happen to me which I do not notice;
these I can 
-813- 

hardly be said to experience. Clearly I experience whatever I remember, but some things which I
do not explicitly remember may have set up habits which still persist. The burnt child fears the
fire, even if he has no recollection of the occasion on which he was burnt. I think we may say that
an event is "experienced" when it sets up a habit. (Memory is one kind of habit.) It is obvious that
habits are only set up in living organisms. A burnt poker does not fear the fire, however often it is
made red-hot. On common-sense grounds, therefore, we shall say that "experience" is not
coextensive with the "stuff" of the world. I do not myself see any valid reason for departing from
common sense on this point. 
Except in this matter of "experience," I find myself in agreement with James's radical empiricism. 
It is otherwise with his pragmatism and "will to believe." The latter, especially, seems to me to be
designed to afford a specious but sophistical defence of certain religious dogmas--a defence,
moreover, which no whole-hearted believer could accept. 
The Will to Believe was published in 1896; Pragmatism, a New Name for Some Old Ways of
Thinking was published in 1907. The doctrine of the latter is an amplification of that of the
former. 
The Will to Believe argues that we are often compelled, in practice, to take decisions where no
adequate theoretical grounds for a decision exist, for even to do nothing is still a decision.
Religious matters, James says, come under this head; we have, he maintains, a right to adopt a
believing attitude although "our merely logical intellect may not have been coerced." This is
essentially the attitude of Rousseau's Savoyard vicar, but James's development is novel. 
The moral duty of veracity, we are told, consists of two coequal precepts: "believe truth," and
"shun error." The sceptic wrongly attends only to the second, and thus fails to believe various
truths which a less cautious man will believe. If believing truth and avoiding error are of equal
importance, I may do well, when presented with an alternative, to believe one of the possibilities
at will, for then I have an even chance of believing truth, whereas I have none if I suspend
judgement. 
The ethic that would result if this doctrine were taken seriously is a very odd one. Suppose I meet
a stranger in the-train, and I ask myself: "Is his name Ebenezer Wilkes Smith?" If I admit that I do 
-814- 

not know, I am certainly not believing truly about his none; whereas, if I decide to believe that that
is his name, there is a chance that I may be believing truly. The sceptic, says James, is afraid of
being duped, and through his fear may lose important truth; "what proof is there," he adds, "that
dupery through hope is so much worse than dupery through fear?" It would seem to follow that, if
I have been hoping for years to meet a man called Ebenezer Wilkes Smith, positive as opposed to
negative veracity should prompt me to believe that this is the name of every stranger I meet, until I
acquire conclusive evidence to the contrary. 
"But," you will say, "the instance is absurd, for, though you do not know the stranger's name, you
do know that a very small percentage of mankind are called Ebenezer Wilkes Smith. You are
therefore not in that state of complete ignorance that is presupposed in your freedom of choice."
Now strange to say, James, throughout his essay, never mentions probability, and yet there is
almost always some discoverable consideration of probability in regard to any question. Let it be
conceded (though no orthodox believer would concede it) that there is no evidence either for or
against any of the religions of the world. Suppose you are a Chinese, brought into contact with
Confucianism, Buddhism, and Christianity. You are precluded by the laws of logic from
supposing that each of the three is true. Let us suppose that Buddhism and Christianity each has an
even chance, then, given that both cannot be true, one of them must be, and therefore
Confucianism must be false. If all three are to have equal chances, each must be more likely to be
false than true. In this sort of way James's principle collapses as soon as we are allowed to bring in
considerations of probability. 
It is curious that, in spite of being an eminent phychologist, James allowed himself at this point a
singular crudity. He spoke as if the only alternatives were complete belief or complete disbelief,
ignoring all shades of doubt. Suppose, for instance, I am looking for a book in my shelves. I think,
"It may be in this shelf," and I proceed to look; but I do not think, "It is in this shelf" until I see it.
We habitually act upon hypotheses, but not precisely as we act upon what we consider certainties;
for when we act upon an hypothesis we keep our eyes open for fresh evidence. 
The precept of veracity, it seems to me, is not such as James thinks. 
-815- 

It is, I should say: "Give to any hypothesis which is worth your while to consider just that degree
of credence which the evidence warrants." And if the hypothesis is sufficiently important there is
the additional duty of seeking further evidence. This is plain common sense, and in harmony with
the procedure in the law courts, but it is quite different from the procedure recommended by
James. 
It would be unfair to James to consider his will to believe in isolation; it was a transitional
doctrine, leading by a natural development to pragmatism. Pragmatism, as it appears in James, is
primarily a new definition of "truth." There were two other protagonists of pragmatism, F.C.S.
Schiller and Dr. John Dewey. I shall consider Dr. Dewey in the next chapter; Schiller was of less
importance than the other two. Between James and Dr. Dewey there is a difference of emphasis.
Dr. Dewey's outlook is scientific, and his arguments are largely derived from an examination of
scientific method, but James is concerned primarily with religion and morals. Roughly speaking,
he is prepared to advocate any doctrine which tends to make people virtuous and happy; if it does
so, it is "true" in the sense in which he uses that word. 
The principle of pragmatism, according to James, was first enunciated by C. S. Peirce, who
maintained that, in order to attain clearness in our thoughts of an object, we need only consider
what conceivable effects of a practical kind the object may involve. James, in elucidation, says
that the function of philosophy is to find out what difference it makes to you or me if this or that
world-formula is true. In this way theories become instruments, not answers to enigmas. 
Ideas, we are told by James, become true in so far as they help us to get into satisfactory relations
with other parts of our experience: "An idea is 'true' so long as to believe it is profitable to our
lives." Truth is one species of good, not a separate category. Truth happens to an idea; it is made
true by events. It is correct to say, with the interectualists, that a true idea must agree with reality,
but "agreeing" does not mean "copying." "To 'agree' in the widest sense with a reality can only
mean to be guided either straight up to it or into its surroundings, or to be put into such working
touch with it as to handle either it or something connected with it better than if we disagreed." He
adds that "the 'true' is only the expedient in the way of our thinking . . . in the long run and on the
whole of course." 
-816- 

In other words, "our obligation to seek truth is part of our general obligation to do what pays." 
In a chapter on pragmatism and religion he reaps the harvest. "We cannot reject any hypothesis if
consequences useful to life flow from it." "If the hypothesis of God works satisfactorily in the
widest sense of the word, it is true." "We may well believe, on the proofs that religious experience
affords, that higher powers exist and are at work to save the world on ideal lines similar to our
own." 
I find great intellectual difficulties in this doctrine. It assumes that a belief is "true" when its
effects are good. If this definition is to be useful--and if not it is condemned by the pragmatist's
test--we must know (a) what is good, (b) what are the effects of this or that belief, and we must
know these things before we can know that anything is "true," since it is only after we have
decided that the effects of a belief are good that we have a right to call it "true." The result is an
incredible complication. Suppose you want to know whether Columbus crossed the Atlantic in
1492. You must not, as other people do, look it up in a book. You must first inquire what are the
effects of this belief, and how they differ from the effects of believing that he sailed in 1491 or
1493. This is difficult enough, but it is still more difficult to weigh the effects from an ethical
point of view. You may say that obviously 1492 has the best effects, since it gives you higher
grades in examinations. But your competitors, who would surpass you if you said 1491 or 1493,
may consider your success instead of theirs ethically regrettable. Apart from examinations, I
cannot think of any practical effects of the belief except in the case of a historian. 
But this is not the end of the trouble. You must hold that your estimate of the consequences of a
belief, both ethical and factual, is true, for if it is false your argument for the truth of your belief is
mistaken. But to say that your belief as to consequences is true is, according to James, to say that
it has good consequences, and this in turn is only true if it has good consequences, and so on ad
infinitum. Obviously this won't do. 
There is another difficulty. Suppose I say there was such a person as Columbus, every one will
agree that what I say is true. But why is it true? Because of a certain man of flesh and blood who
lived 450 years ago--in short, because of the causes of my belief, not because of its effects. With
James's definition, it might happen that "A exists" 
-817- 

is true although in fact A does not exist. I have always found that the hypothesis of Santa Claus
"works satisfactorily in the widest sense of the word"; therefore "Santa Claus exists" is true,
although Santa Claus does not exist. James says (I repeat): "If the hypothesis of God works
satisfactorily in the widest sense of the word, it is true." This simply omits as unimportant the
question whether God really is in His heaven; if He is a useful hypothesis, that is enough. God the
Architect of the Cosmos is forgotten; all that is remembered is belief in God, and its effects upon
the creatures inhabiting our petty planet. No wonder the Pope condemned the pragmatic fence of
religion. 
We come here to a fundamental difference between James's religious outlook and that of religious
people in the past. James is interested in religion as a human phenomenon, but shows little interest
in the objects which religion contemplates. He wants people to be happy, and if belief in God
makes them happy let them believe in Him. This, so far, is only benevolence, not philosophy; it
becomes philosophy when it is said that if the belief makes them happy it is "true." To the man
who desires an object of worship this is unsatisfactory. He is not concerned to say, "If I believed in
God I should be happy"; he is concerned to say, "I believe in God and therefore I am happy." And
when he believes in God, he believes in Him as he believes in the existence of Roosevelt or
Churchill or Hitler; God, for him, is an actual Being, not merely a human idea which has good
effects. It is this genuine belief that has the good effects, not James's emasculate substitute. It is
obvious that if I say " Hitler exists" I do not mean "the effects of believing that Hitler exists are
good." And to the genuine believer the same is true of God. 
James's doctrine is an attempt to build a superstructure of belief upon a foundation of scepticism,
and like all such attempts it is dependent on fallacies. In his case the fallacies spring from an
attempt to ignore all extra-human facts. Berkeleian idealism combined with scepticism causes him
to substitute belief in God for God, and to pretend that this will do just as well. But this is only a
form of the subjectivistic madness which is characteristic of most modern philosophy. 
-818- 
