CHAPTER XXIV Early Greek Mathematics and Astronomy 
I AM concerned in this chapter with mathematics, not on its own account, but as it was related to
Greek philosophy--a relation which, especially in Plato, was very close. The preeminence of the
Greeks appears more clearly in mathematics and astronomy than in anything else. What they did
in art, in literature, and in philosophy, may be judged better or worse according to taste, but what
they accomplished in geometry is wholly beyond question. They derived something from Egypt,
and rather less from Babylonia; but what they obtained from these sources was, in mathematics,
mainly rules of thumb, and in astronomy records of observations extended over very long periods.
The art of mathematical demonstration was, almost wholly, Greek in origin. 
There are many pleasant stories, probably unhistorical, showing what practical problems
stimulated mathematical investigations. The earliest and simplest relates to Thales, who, when in
Egypt, was asked by the king to find out the height of a pyramid. He waited for the time of day
when his shadow was as long as he was tall; he then measured the shadow of the pyramid, which
was of course equal to its height. It is said that the laws of perspective were first studied by the
geometer Agatharcus, in order to paint scenery for the plays of Aeschylus. The problem of finding
the distance of a ship at sea, which was said to have been studied by Thales, was correctly solved
at an early stage. One of the great problems that occupied Greek geometers, that of the duplication
of the cube, originated, we are told, with the priests of a certain temple, who were informed by the
oracle that the god wanted a statue twice as large as the one they had. At first 
-208- 

they
thought
simply of
doubling
all the
dimensions
of the
statue, but
then they
realized
that the
result
would be
eight times
as large as
the
original,
which
would
involve
more
expense
than the
god had
demanded.
So they
sent a
deputation
to Plato to
ask
whether
anybody in
the
Academy
could solve
their
problem.
The
geometers
took it up,
and worked
at it for
centuries,
producing,
incidentall
y, much
admirable
work. The
problem is,
of course,
that of
determinin
g the cube

* G
r
e
e
k
M
a
t
h
e
m
a
ti
c
s,
V
ol
.
I,
p.
1
4
5.
-209- 

graceful, and implies that he himself began to know about it rather late in life. It had of course an
important bearing on the Pythagorean philosophy. 
One of the most important consequences of the discovery of irrationals was the invention of the
geometrical theory of proportion by Eudoxus (ca. 408 -- ca. 355 B.C.). Before him, there was only
the arithmetical theory of proportion. According to this theory, the ratio of a to b is equal to the
ratio of c to d if a times d is equal to b times c. This definition, in the absence of an arithmetical
theory of irrationals, is only applicable to rationals. Eudoxus, however, gave a new definition not
subject to this restriction, framed in a manner which suggests the methods of modern analysis.
The theory is developed in Euclid, and has great logical beauty. 
Eudoxus also either invented or perfected the "method of exhaustion," which was subsequently
used with great success by Archimedes. This method is an anticipation of the integral calculus.
Take, for example, the question of the area of a circle. You can inscribe in a circle a regular
hexagon, or a regular dodecagon, or a regular polygon of a thousand or a million sides. The area
of such a polygon, however many sides it has, is proportional to the square on the diameter of the
circle. The more sides the polygon has, the more nearly it becomes equal to the circle. You can
prove that, if you give the polygon enough sides, its area can be got to differ from that of the circle
by less than any previously assigned area, however small. For this purpose, the "axiom of
Archimedes" is used. This states (when somewhat simplified) that if the greater of two quantities
is halved, and then the half is halved, and so on, a quantity will be reached, at last, which is less
than the smaller of the original two quantities. In other words, if a is greater than b, there is some
whole number n such that 2n times b is greater than a. 
The method of exhaustion sometimes leads to an exact result, as in squaring the parabola, which
was done by Archimedes; sometimes, as in the attempt to square the circle, it can only lead to
successive approximations. The problem of squaring the circle is the problem of determining the
ratio of the circumference of a circle to the diameter, which is called π. Archimedes used the
approximation 22/7 in calculations; by inscribing and circumscribing a regular polygon of 96
sides, he proved that π is less than 3 1/7 and greater 
-210- 

than 3 10/71. The method could be carried to any required degree of approximation, and that is all
that any method can do in this problem. The use of inscribed and circumscribed polygons for
approximations to π goes back to Antiphon, who was a contemporary of Socrates. 
Euclid, who was still, when I was young, the sole acknowledged text-book of geometry for boys,
lived at Alexandria, about 300 B.C., a few years after the death of Alexander and Aristotle. Most
of his Elements was not original, but the order of propositions, and the logical structure, were
largely his. The more one studies geometry, the more admirable these are seen to be. The
treatment of parallels by means of the famous postulate of parallels has the twofold merit of rigour
in deduction and of not concealing the dubiousness of the initial assumption. The theory of
proportion, which follows Eudoxus, avoids all the difficulties connected with irrationals, by
methods essentially similar to those introduced by Weierstrass into nineteenthcentury analysis.
Euclid then passes on to a kind of geometrical algebra, and deals, in Book X, with the subject of
irrationals. After this he proceeds to solid geometry, ending with the construction of the regular
solids, which had been perfected by Theaetetus and assumed in Plato's Timaeus. 
Euclid Elements is certainly one of the greatest books ever written, and one of the most perfect
monuments of the Greek intellect. It has, of course, the typical Greek limitations: the method is
purely deductive, and there is no way, within it, of testing the initial assumptions. These
assumptions were supposed to be unquestionable, but in the nineteenth century non-Euclidean
geometry showed that they might be in part mistaken, and that only observation could decide
whether they were so. 
There is in Euclid the contempt for practical utility which had been inculcated by Plato. It is said
that a pupil, after listening to a demonstration, asked what he would gain by learning geometry,
whereupon Euclid called a slave and said "Give the young man threepence, since he must needs
make a gain out of what he learns." The contempt for practice was, however, pragmatically
justified. No one, in Greek times, supposed that conic sections had any utility; at last, in the
seventeenth century, Galileo discovered that projectiles move in parabolas, and Kepler discovered
that planets move in ellipses. Sud- 
-211- 

denly the work that the Greeks had done from pure love of theory became the key to warfare
and astronomy. 
The Romans were too practical-minded to appreciate Euclid; the first of them to mention him is
Cicero, in whose time there was probably no Latin translation; indeed there is no record of any
Latin translation before Boethius (ca. A.D. 480). The Arabs were more appreciative: a copy was
given to the caliph by the Byzantine emperor about A.D. 760, and a translation into Arabic was
made under Harun al Rashid, about A.D. 800. The first still extant Latin translation was made
from the Arabic by Athelhard of Bath in A.D. 1120. From that time on, the study of geometry
gradually revived in the West; but it was not until the late Renaissance that important advances
were made. 
I come now to astronomy, where Greek achievements were as remarkable as in geometry.
Before their time, among the Babylonians and Egyptians, many centuries of observation had
laid a foundation. The apparent motions of the planets had been recorded, but it was not known
that the morning and evening star were the same. A cycle of eclipses had been discovered,
certainly in Babylonia and probably in Egypt, which made the prediction of lunar eclipses fairly
reliable, but not of solar eclipses, since those were not always visible at a given spot. We owe to
the Babylonians the division of the right angle into ninety degrees, and of the degree into sixty
minutes; they had a liking for the number sixty, and even a system of numeration based upon it.
The Greeks were fond of attributing the wisdom of their pioneers to travels in Egypt, but what
had really been achieved before the Greeks was very little. The prediction of an eclipse by
Thales was, however, an example of foreign influence; there is no reason to suppose that he
added anything to what he learnt from Egyptian or Babylonian sources, and it was a stroke of
luck that his prediction was verified. 
Let us begin with some of the earliest discoveries and correct hypotheses. Anaximander thought
that the earth floats freely, and is not supported on anything. Aristotle, * who often rejected the
best hypotheses of his time, objected to the theory of Anaximander, that the earth, being at the
centre, remained immovable because there was 
____________________ 
* De Caelo, 295b. 
-212- 

no reason for moving in one direction rather than another. If this were valid, he said, a man placed
at the centre of a circle with food at various points of the circumference would starve to death for
lack of reason to choose one portion of food rather than another. This argument reappears in
scholastic philosophy, not in connection with astronomy, but with free will. It reappears in the
form of "Buridan's ass," which was unable to choose between two bundles of hay placed at equal
distances to right and left, and therefore died of hunger. 
Pythagoras, in all probability, was the first to think the earth spherical, but his reasons were (one
must suppose) aesthetic rather than scientific. Scientific reasons, however, were soon found.
Anaxagoras discovered that the moon shines by reflected light, and gave the right theory of
eclipses. He himself still thought the earth flat, but the shape of the earth's shadow in lunar
eclipses gave the Pythagoreans conclusive arguments in favour of its being spherical. They went
further, and regarded the earth as one of the planets. They knew-from Pythagoras himself, it is
said--that the morning star and the evening star are identical, and they thought that all the planets,
including the earth, move in circles, not round the sun, but round the "central fire." They had
discovered that the moon always turns the same face to the earth, and they thought that the earth
always turns the same face to the "central fire." The Mediterranean regions were on the side turned
away from the central fire, which was therefore always invisible. The central fire was called "the
house of Zeus," or "the Mother of the gods." The sun was supposed to shine by light reflected
from the central fire. In addition to the earth, there was another body, the counter-earth, at the
same distance from the central fire. For this, they had two reasons, one scientific, one derived
from their arithmetical mysticism. The scientific reason was the correct observation that an eclipse
of the moon sometimes occurs when both sun and moon are above the horizon. Refraction, which
is the cause of this phenomenon, was unknown to them, and they thought that, in such cases, the
eclipse must be due to the shadow of a body other than the earth. The other reason was that the
sun and moon, the five planets, the earth and counter-earth, and the central fire, made ten heavenly
bodies, and ten was the mystic number of the Pythagoreans. 
This Pythagorean theory is attributed to Philolaus, a Theban, who 
-213- 

lived at the end of the fifth century B.C. Although it is fanciful and in part quite unscientific, it
is very important, since it involves the greater part of the imaginative effort required for
conceiving the Copernican hypothesis. To conceive of the earth, not as the centre of the
universe, but as one among the planets, not as eternally fixed, but as wandering through space,
showed an extraordinary emancipation from anthropocentric thinking. When once this jolt had
been given to men's natural picture of the universe, it was not so very difficult to be led by
scientific arguments to a more accurate theory. 
To this various observations contributed. Oenopides, who was slightly later than Anaxagoras,
discovered the obliquity of the ecliptic. It soon became clear that the sun must be much larger
than the earth, which fact supported those who denied that the earth is the centre of the
universe. The central fire and the counter-earth were dropped by the Pythagoreans soon after the
time of Plato. Heraclides of Pontus (whose dates are about 388 to 315 B.C., contemporary with
Aristotle) discovered that Venus and Mercury revolve about the sun, and adopted the view that
the earth rotates on its own axis once every twenty-four hours. This last was a very important
step, which no predecessor had taken. Heraclides was of Plato's school, and must have been a
great man, but was not as much respected as one would expect; he is described as a fat dandy. 
Aristarchus of Samos, who lived approximately from 310 to 230 B.C., and was thus about
twenty-five years older than Archimedes, is the most interesting of all ancient astronomers,
because he advanced the complete Copernican hypothesis, that all the planets, including the
earth, revolve in circles round the sun, and that the earth rotates on its axis once in twenty-four
hours. It is a little disappointing to find that the only extant work of Aristarchus, On the Sizes
and Distances of the Sun and the Moon, adheres to the geocentric view. It is true that, for the
problems with which this book deals, it makes no difference which theory is adopted, and he
may therefore have thought it unwise to burden his calculations with an unnecessary opposition
to the general opinion of astronomers; or he may have only arrived at the Copernican hypothesis
after writing this book. Sir Thomas Heath, in his work on Aristarchus, * which contains the text
of this book 
____________________ 
* Aristarchus of Samos, the Ancient Copernicus. By Sir Thomas Heath. Oxford 1913. What
follows is based on this book. 
-214- 

with a translation, inclines to the latter view. The evidence that Aristarchus suggested the
Copernican view is, in any case, quite conclusive. 
The first and best evidence is that of Archimedes, who, as we have seen, was a younger
contemporary of Aristarchus. Writing to Gelon, King of Syracuse, he says that Aristarchus
brought out "a book consisting of certain hypotheses," and continues: "His hypotheses are that
the fixed stars and the sun remain unmoved, that the earth revolves about the sun in the
circumference of a circle, the sun lying in the middle of the orbit." There is a passage in
Plutarch saying that Cleanthes "thought it was the duty of the Greeks to indict Aristarchus of
Samos on the charge of impiety for putting in motion the Hearth of the Universe (i.e. the earth),
this being the effect of his attempt to save the phenomena by supposing the heaven to remain at
rest and the earth to revolve in an oblique circle, while it rotates, at the same time, about its own
axis." Cleanthes was a contemporary of Aristarchus, and died about 232 B.C. In another
passage, Plutarch says that Aristarchus advanced this view only as a hypothesis, but that his
successor Seleucus maintained it as a definite opinion. ( Seleucus flourished about 150 B.C.).
Aëtius and Sextus Empiricus also assert that Aristarchus advanced the heliocentric
hypothesis, but do not say that it was set forth by him only as a hypothesis. Even if he did so, it
seems not unlikely that he, like Galileo two thousand years later, was influenced by the fear of
offending religious prejudices, a fear which the attitude of Cleanthes (mentioned above) shows
to have been well grounded. 
The Copernican hypothesis, after being advanced, whether positively or tentatively, by
Aristarchus, was definitely adopted by Seleucus, but by no other ancient astronomer. This
general rejection was mainly due to Hipparchus, who flourished from 161 to 126 B.C. He is
described by Heath as "the greatest astronomer of antiquity." * He was the first to write
systematically on trigonometry; he discovered the precession of the equinoxes; he estimated the
length of the lunar month with an error of less than one second; he improved Aristarchus's
estimates of the sizes and distances of the sun and moon; he made a catalogue of eight hundred
and fifty fixed stars, giving 
____________________ 
* Greek Mathematics, Vol. II, p. 253. 
-215- 
their latitude and longitude. As against the heliocentric hypothesis of Aristarchus, he adopted and
improved the theory of epicycles which had been invented by Apollonius, who flourished about
220 B.C.; it was a development of this theory that came to be known, later, as the Ptolemaic
system, after the astronomer Ptolemy, who flourished in the middle of the second century A.D.
Copernicus came to know something, though not much, of the almost forgotten hypothesis of
Aristarchus, and was encouraged by finding ancient authority for his innovation. Otherwise, the
effect of this hypothesis on subsequent astronomy was practically nil.Ancient astronomers, in
estimating the sizes of the earth, moon, and sun, and the distances of the moon and sun, used
methods which were theoretically valid, but they were hampered by the lack of instruments of
precision. Many of their results, in view of this lack, were surprisingly good. Eratosthenes
estimated the earth's diameter at 7850 miles, which is only about fifty miles short of the truth.
Ptolemy estimated the mean distance of the moon at 29 ½ times the earth's diameter; the correct
figure is about 30.7. None of them got anywhere near the size and distance of the sun, which all
underestimated. Their estimates, in terms of the earth's diameter, were: 
Aristarchus, 180; 
Hipparchus, 1245; 

Posidonius, 6545. 
The correct figure is 11,726. It will be seen that these estimates continually improved (that of
Ptolemy, however, showed a retrogression); that of Posidonius * is about half the correct figure.
On the whole, their picture of the solar system was not so very far from the truth. 
Greek astronomy was geometrical, not dynamic. The ancients thought of the motions of the
heavenly bodies as uniform and circular, or compounded of circular motions. They had not the
conception of force. There were spheres which moved as a whole, and on which the various
heavenly bodies were fixed. With Newton and gravitation a new point of view, less geometrical,
was introduced. It is curious to observe that there is a reversion to the geometrical point 
____________________ 
* Posidonius was Cicero's teacher. He flourished in the latter half of the second century. B.C. 
-216- 
of view in Einstein's General Theory of Relativity, from which the conception of force, in the
Newtonian sense, has been banished. 
The problem for the astronomer is this: given the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies on the
celestial sphere, to introduce, by hypothesis, a third co-ordinate, depth, in such a way as to make
the description of the phenomena as simple as possible. The merit of the Copernican hypothesis is
not truth, but simplicity; in view of the relativity of motion, no question of truth is involved. The
Greeks, in their search for hypotheses which would "save the phenomena," were in effect, though
not altogether in intention, tackling the problem in the scientifically correct way. A comparison
with their predecessors, and with their successors until Copernicus, must convince every student
of their truly astonishing genius. 
Two very great men, Archimedes and Apollonius, in the third century B.C., complete the list of
first-class Greek mathematicians. Archimedes was a friend, probably a cousin, of the king of
Syracuse, and was killed when that city was captured by the Romans in 212 B.C. Apollonius,
from his youth, lived at Alexandria. Archimedes was not only a mathematician, but also a
physicist and student of hydrostatics. Apollonius is chiefly noted for his work on conic sections. I
shall say no more about them, as they came too late to influence philosophy. 
After these two men, though respectable work continued to be done in Alexandria, the great age
was ended. Under the Roman domination, the Greeks lost the self-confidence that belongs to
political liberty, and in losing it acquired a paralysing respect for their predecessors. The Roman
soldier who killed Archimedes was a symbol of the death of original thought that Rome caused
throughout the Hellenic world. 
-217- 
