modern England, but less than there should be on Locke's principles, since the legislature
overshadowed the executive. What the French Constitution will be after the present war it is
impossible to foresee. 
The country where Locke's principle of the division of powers has found its fullest application is
the United States, where the President and Congress are wholly independent of each other, and the
Supreme Court is independent of both. Inadvertently, the Constitution made the Supreme Court a
branch of the legislature, since nothing is a law if the Supreme Court says it is not. The fact that
its powers are nominally only interpretative in reality increases those powers, since it makes it
difficult to criticize what are supposed to be purely legal decisions. It says a very great deal for the
political sagacity of Americans that this Constitution has only once led to armed conflict. 
Locke's political philosophy was, on the whole, adequate and useful until the industrial revolution.
Since then, it has been increasingly unable to tackle the important problems. The power of
property, as embodied in vast corporations, grew beyond anything imagined by Locke. The
necessary functions of the State--for example, in education--increased enormously. Nationalism
brought about an alliance, sometimes an amalgamation, of economic and political power, making
war the principal means of competition. The single separate citizen has no longer the power and
independence that he had in Locke's speculations. Our age is one of organization, and its conflicts
are between organizations, not between separate individuals. The state of nature, as Locke says,
still exists as between States. A new international Social Contract is necessary before we can
enjoy the promised benefits of government. When once an international government has been
created, much of Locke's political philosophy will again become applicable, though not the part of
it that deals with private property. 
-640- 
CHAPTER XV Locke's Influence 
FROM the time of Locke down to the present day, there have been in Europe two main types of
philosophy, and one of these owes both its doctrines and its method to Locke, while the other was
derived first from Descartes and then from Kant. Kant himself thought that he had made a
synthesis of the philosophy derived from Descartes and that derived from Locke; but this cannot
be admitted, at least from a historical point of view, for the followers of Kant were in the
Cartesian, not the Lockean, tradition. The heirs of Locke are, first Berkeley and Hume; second,
those of the French philosophes who did not belong to the school of Rousseau; third, Bentham
and the philosophical Radicals; fourth, with important accretions from Continental philosophy,
Marx and his disciples. But Marx's system is eclectic, and any simple statement about it is almost
sure to be false; I will, therefore, leave him on one side until I come to consider him in detail. 
In Locke's own day, his chief philosophical opponents were the Cartesians and Leibniz. Quite
illogically, the victory of Locke's philosophy in England and France was largely due to the
prestige of Newton. Descartes' authority as a philosopher was enhanced, in his own day, by his
work in mathematics and natural philosophy. But his doctrine of vortices was definitely inferior to
Newton's law of gravitation as an explanation of the solar system. The victory of the Newtonian
cosmogony diminished men's respect for Descartes and increased their respect for England. Both
these causes inclined men favourably towards Locke. In eighteenth-century France, where the
intellectuals were in rebellion against an antiquated, corrupt, and effete despotism, they regarded
England as the home of freedom, and were predisposed in favour of Locke's philosophy by his
political doctrines. In the last times before the Revolution. Locke's influence 
-641- 

in France was reinforced by that of Hume, who lived for a time in France and was personally
acquainted with many of the leading savants. 
The chief transmitter of English influence to France was Voltaire. 
In England, the philosophical followers of Locke, until the French Revolution, took no interest
in his political doctrines. Berkeley was a bishop not much interested in politics; Hume was a
Tory who followed the lead of Bolingbroke. England was politically quiescent in their time, and
a philosopher could be content to theorize without troubling himself about the state of the
world. The French Revolution changed this, and forced the best minds into opposition to the
status quo. Nevertheless, the tradition in pure philosophy remained unbroken. Shelley Necessity
of Atheism, for which he was expelled from Oxford, is full of Locke's influence. * 
Until the publication of Kant Critique of Pure Reason in 1781, it might have seemed as if the
older philosophical tradition of Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz were being definitely overcome
by the newer empirical method. This newer method, however, had never prevailed in German
universities, and after 1792 it was held responsible for the horrors of the Revolution. Recanting
revolutionaries such as Coleridge found in Kant an intellectual support for their opposition to
French atheism. The Germans, in their resistance to the French, were glad to have a German
philosophy to uphold them. Even the French, after the fall of Napoleon, were glad of any
weapon against Jacobinism. All these factors favoured Kant. 
Kant, like Darwin, gave rise to a movement which he would have detested. Kant was a liberal, a
democrat, a pacifist, but those who professed to develop his philosophy were none of these
things. Or, if they still called themselves Liberals, they were Liberals of a new species. Since
Rousseau and Kant, there have been two schools of liberalism, which may be distinguished as
the hard-headed and the soft-hearted. The hard-headed developed, through Bentham, Ricardo,
and Marx, by logical stages into Stalin; the soft-hearted, by other logical stages, through Fichte,
Byron, Carlyle, and Nietzsche, into Hitler. This statement, of course, is too schematic to be
quite true, 
____________________ 
* Take, e.g., Shelley's dictum: "When a proposition is offered to the mind, it perceives the
agreement or disagreement of the ideas of which it is composed." 
-642- 

but it may serve as a map and a mnemonic. The stages in the evolution of ideas have had almost
the quality of the Hegelian dialectic: doctrines have developed, by steps that each seem natural,
into their opposites. But the developments have not been due solely to the inherent movement of
ideas; they have been governed, throughout, by external circumstances and the reflection of these
circumstances in human emotions. That this is the case may be made evident by one outstanding
fact: that the ideas of liberalism have undergone no part of this development in America, where
they remain to this day as in Locke. 
Leaving politics on one side, let us examine the differences between the two schools of
philosophy, which may be broadly distinguished as the Continental and the British respectively. 
There is first of all a difference of method. British philosophy is more detailed and piecemeal than
that of the Continent; when it allows itself some general principle, it sets to work to prove it
inductively by examining its various applications. Thus Hume, after announcing that there is no
idea without an antecedent impression, immediately proceeds to consider the following objection:
suppose you are seeing two shades of colour which are similar but not identical, and suppose you
have never seen a shade of colour intermediate between the two, can you nevertheless imagine
such a shade? He does not decide the question, and considers that a decision adverse to his general
principle would not be fatal to him, because his principle is not logical but empirical. When--to
take a contrast--Leibniz wants to establish his monadology, he argues, roughly, as follows:
Whatever is complex must be composed of simple parts; what is simple cannot be extended;
therefore everything is composed of parts having no extension. But what is not extended is not
matter. Therefore the ultimate constituents of things are not material, and, if not material, then
mental. Consequently a table is really a colony of souls. 
The difference of method, here, may be characterized as follows: In Locke or Hume, a
comparatively modest conclusion is drawn from a broad survey of many facts, whereas in Leibniz
a vast edifice of deduction is pyramided upon a pin-point of logical principle. In Leibniz, if the
principle is completely true and the deductions are entirely valid, all is well; but the structure is
unstable, and the slightest flaw anywhere brings it down in ruins. In Locke or Hume, on the 
-643- 

contrary, the base of the pyramid is on the solid ground of observed fact, and the pyramid tapers
upward, not downward; consequently the equilibrium is stable, and a flaw here or there can be
rectified without total disaster. This difference of method survived Kant's attempt to incorporate
something of the empirical philosophy: from Descartes to Hegel on the one side, and from Locke
to John Stuart Mill on the other, it remains unvarying. 
The difference in method is connected with various other differences. Let us take first
metaphysics. 
Descartes offered metaphysical proofs of the existence of God, of which the most important had
been invented in the eleventh century by Saint Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury. Spinoza had a
pantheistic God, who seemed to the orthodox to be no God at all; however that may be, Spinoza's
arguments were essentially metaphysical, and are traceable (though he may not have realized this)
to the doctrine that every proposition must have a subject and a predicate. Leibniz's metaphysics
had the same source. 
In Locke, the philosophical direction that he inaugurated is not yet fully developed; he accepts as
valid Descartes' arguments as to the existence of God. Berkeley invented a wholly new argument;
but Hume--in whom the new philosophy comes to completion--rejected metaphysics entirely, and
held that nothing can be discovered by reasoning on the subjects with which metaphysics is
concerned. This view persisted in the empirical school, while the opposite view, somewhat
modified, persisted in Kant and his disciples. 
In ethics, there is a similar division between the two schools. 
Locke, as we saw, believed pleasure to be the good, and this was the prevalent view among
empiricists throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Their opponents, on the contrary,
despised pleasure as ignoble, and had various systems of ethics which seemed more exalted.
Hobbes valued power, and Spinoza, up to a point, agreed with Hobbes. There are in Spinoza two
unreconciled views on ethics, one that of Hobbes, the other that the good consists in mystic union
with God. Leibniz made no important contribution to ethics, but Kant made ethics supreme, and
derived his metaphysics from ethical premisses. Kant's ethic is important, because it is anti-
utilitarian, a priori, and what is called "noble." 
-644- 

Kant says that if you are kind to your brother because you are fond of him, you have no moral
merit: an act only has moral merit when it is performed because the moral law enjoins it.
Although pleasure is not the good, it is nevertheless unjust--so Kant maintains-that the virtuous
should suffer. Since this often happens in this world, there must be another world where they are
rewarded after death, and there must be a God to secure justice in the life hereafter. He rejects all
the old metaphysical arguments for God and immortality, but considers his new ethical argument
irrefutable. 
Kant himself was a man whose outlook on practical affairs was kindly and humanitarian, but the
same cannot be said of most of those who rejected happiness as the good. The sort of ethic that is
called "noble" is less associated with attempts to improve the world than is the more mundane
view that we should seek to make men happier. This is not surprising. Contempt for happiness is
easier when the happiness is other people's than when it is our own. Usually the substitute for
happiness is some form of heroism. This affords unconscious outlets for the impulse to power,
and abundant excuses for cruelty. Or, again, what is valued may be strong emotion; this was the
case with the romantics. This led to a toleration of such passions as hatred and revenge; Byron's
heroes are typical, and are never persons of exemplary behaviour. The men who did most to
promote human happiness were--as might have been expected--those who thought happiness
important, not those who despised it in comparison with something more "sublime." Moreover, a
man's ethic usually reflects his character, and benevolence leads to a desire for the general
happiness. Thus the men who thought happiness the end of life tended to be the more benevolent,
while those who proposed other ends were often dominated, unconsciously, by cruelty or love of
power. 
These ethical differences are associated, usually though not invariably, with differences in politics.
Locke, as we saw, is tentative in his beliefs, not at all authoritarian, and willing to leave every
question to be decided by free discussion. The result, both in his case and in that of his followers,
was a belief in reform, but of a gradual sort. Since their systems of thought were piecemeal, and
the result of separate investigations of many different questions, their political views tended
naturally to have the same character. They fought 
-645- 

shy of large programmes all cut out of one block, and preferred to consider each question on its
merits. In politics as in philosophy, they were tentative and experimental. Their opponents, on the
other hand, who thought they could "grasp this sorry scheme of things entire," were much more
willing to "shatter it to bits and then remould it nearer to the heart's desire." They might do this as
revolutionaries, or as men who wished to increase the authority of the powers that be; in either
case, they did not shrink from violence in pursuit of vast objectives, and they condemned love of
peace as ignoble. 
The great political defect of Locke and his disciples, from a modern point of view, was their
worship of property. But those who criticized them on this account often did so in the interest of
classes that were more harmful than the capitalists, such as monarchs, aristocrats, and militarists.
The aristocratic landowner, whose income comes to him without effort and in accordance with
immemorial custom, does not think of himself as a money-grubber, and is not so thought of by
men who do not look below the picturesque surface. The business man, on the contrary, is
engaged in the conscious pursuit of wealth, and while his activities were more or less novel they
roused a resentment not felt towards the gentlemanly exactions of the landowner. That is to say,
this was the case with middle-class writers and those who read them; it was not the case with the
peasants, as appeared in the French and Russian Revolutions. But peasants are inarticulate. 
Most of the opponents of Locke's school had an admiration for war, as being heroic and involving
a contempt for comfort and ease. Those who adopted a utilitarian ethic, on the contrary, tended to
regard most wars as folly. This, again, at least in the nineteenth century, brought them into
alliance with the capitalists, who disliked wars because they interfered with trade. The capitalists'
motive was, of course, pure self-interest, but it led to views more consonant with the general
interest than those of militarists and their literary supporters. The attitude of capitalists to war, it is
true, has fluctuated. England's wars of the eighteenth century, except the American war, were on
the whole profitable, and were supported by business men; but throughout the nineteenth century,
until its last years, they favoured peace. In modern times, big business, everywhere, has come into
such intimate relations with the national State that the 
-646- 
