are supposed to hang. They have in fact no need of a hook, any more than the earth needs an
elephant to rest upon. Any one can see, in the analogous case of a geographical region, that such a
word as " France" (say) is only a linguistic convenience, and that there is not a thing called
"France" over and above its various parts. The same holds of "Mr. Smith"; it is a collective name
for a number of occurrences. If we take it as anything more, it denotes something completely
unknowable, and therefore not needed for the expression of what we know. 
"Substance," in a word, is a metaphysical mistake, due to transference to the world-structure of the
structure of sentences composed of a subject and a predicate. 
I conclude that the Aristotelian doctrines with which we have been concerned in this chapter are
wholly false, with the exception of the formal theory of the syllogism, which is unimportant. Any
person in the present day who wishes to learn logic will be wasting his time if he reads Aristotle
or any of his disciples. None the less, Aristotle's logical writings show great ability, and would
have been useful to mankind if they had appeared at a time when intellectual originality was still
active. Unfortunately, they appeared at the very end of the creative period of Greek thought, and
therefore came to be accepted as authoritative. By the time that logical orginality revived, a reign
of two thousand years had made Aristotle very difficult to dethrone. Throughout modern times,
practically every advance in science, in logic, or in philosophy has had to be made in the teeth of
the opposition from Aristotle's disciples. 
-202- 
CHAPTER XXIII Aristotle's Physics 
IN this chapter I propose to consider two of Aristotle's books, the one called Physics and the one
called On the Heavens. These two books are closely connected; the second takes up the argument
at the point at which the first has left it. Both were extremely influential, and dominated science
until the time of Galileo. Words such as "quintessence" and "sublunary" are derived from the
theories expressed in these books. The historian of philosophy, accordingly, must study them, in
spite of the fact that hardly a sentence in either can be accepted in the light of modern science. 
To understand the views of Aristotle, as of most Greeks, on physics, it is necessary to apprehend
their imaginative background. Every philosopher, in addition to the formal system which he offers
to the world, has another, much simpler, of which he may be quite unaware. If he is aware of it, he
probably realizes that it won't quite do; he therefore conceals it, and sets forth something more
sophisticated, which he believes because it is like his crude system, but which he asks others to
accept because he thinks he has made it such as cannot be disproved. The sophistication comes in
by way of refutation of refutations, but this alone will never give a positive result: it shows, at
best, that a theory may be true, not that it must be. The positive result, however little the
philosopher may realize it, is due to his imaginative preconceptions, or to what Santayana calls
"animal faith." 
In relation to physics, Aristotle's imaginative background was very different from that of a modern
student. Now-a-days, a boy begins with mechanics, which, by its very name, suggests machines.
He is accustomed to motor-cars and aeroplanes; he does not, even in the dimmest recesses of his
subconscious imagination, think that a motorcar contains some sort of horse in its inside, or that
an aeroplane flies 
-203- 

because its wings are those of a bird possessing magical powers. Animals have lost their
importance in our imaginative pictures of the world, in which man stands comparatively alone as
master of a mainly lifeless and largely subservient material environment. 
To the Greek, attempting to give a scientific account of motion, the purely mechanical view hardly
suggested itself, except in the case of a few men of genius such as Democritus and Archimedes.
Two sets of phenomena seemed important: the movements of animals, and the movements of the
heavenly bodies. To the modern man of science, the body of an animal is a very elaborate
machine, with an enormously complex physico-chemical structure; every new discovery consists
in diminishing the apparent gulf between animals and machines. To the Greek, it seemed more
natural to assimilate apparently lifeless motions to those of animals. A child still distinguishes live
animals from other things by the fact that they can move of themselves; to many Greeks, and
especially to Aristotle, this peculiarity suggested itself as the basis of a general theory of physics. 
But how about the heavenly bodies? They differ from animals by the regularity of their
movements, but this may be only due to their superior perfection. Every Greek philosopher,
whatever he may have come to think in adult life, had been taught in childhood to regard the sun
and moon as gods; Anaxagoras was prosecuted for impiety because he thought that they were not
alive. It was natural that a philosopher who could no longer regard the heavenly bodies themselves
as divine should think of them as moved by the will of a Divine Being who had a Hellenic love of
order and geometrical simplicity. Thus the ultimate source of all movement is Will: on earth the
capricious Will of human beings and animals, but in heaven the unchanging Will of the Supreme
Artificer. 
I do not suggest that this applies to every detail of what Aristotle has to say. What I do suggest is
that it gives his imaginative background, and represents the sort of thing which, in embarking on
his investigations, he would expect to find true. 
After these preliminaries, let us examine what it is that he actually says. 
Physics, in Aristotle, is the science of what the Greeks called "phusis" (or "physis"), a word which
is translated "nature," but has not exactly the meaning which we attach to that word. We still
speak 
-204- 

of "natural science" and "natural history," but "nature" by itself, though it is a very ambiguous
word, seldom means just what "phusis" meant. "Phusis" had to do with growth; one might say it is
the "nature" of an acorn to grow into an oak, and in that case one would be using the word in the
Aristotelian sense. The "nature" of a thing, Aristotle says, is its end, that for the sake of which it
exists. Thus the word has a teleological implication. Some things exist by nature, some from other
causes. Animals, plants, and simple bodies (elements) exist by nature; they have an internal
principle of motion. (The word translated "motion" or "movement" has a wider meaning than
"locomotion"; in addition to locomotion it includes change of quality or of size.) Nature is a
source of being moved or at rest. Things "have a nature" if they have an internal principle of this
kind. The phrase "according to nature" applies to these things and their essential attributes. (It was
through this point of view that "unnatural" came to express blame.) Nature is in form rather than
in matter; what is potentially flesh or bone has not yet acquired its own nature, and a thing is more
what it is when it has attained to fulfilment. This whole point of view seems to be suggested by
biology: the acorn is "potentially" an oak. 
Nature belongs to the class of causes which operate for the sake of something. This leads to a
discussion of the view that nature works of necessity, without purpose, in connection with which
Aristotle discusses the survival of the fittest, in the form taught by Empedocles. This cannot be
right, he says, because things happen in fixed ways, and when a series has a completion, all
preceding steps are for its sake. Those things are "natural" which "by a continuous movement
originated from an internal principle, arrive at some completion" (199b). 
This whole conception of "nature," though it might well seem admirably suited to explain the
growth of animals and plants, became, in the event, a great obstacle to the progress of science, and
a source of much that was bad in ethics. In the latter respect, it is still harmful. 
Motion, we are told, is the fulfilling of what exists potentially. This view, apart from other defects,
is incompatible with the relativity of locomotion. When A moves relatively to B, B moves
relatively to A, and there is no sense in saying that one of the two is in motion while the other is at
rest. When a dog seizes a bone, it seems to common 
-205- 

sense that the dog moves while the bone remains at rest (until seized), and that the motion has a
purpose, namely to fulfil the dog's "nature." But it has turned out that this point of view cannot be
applied to dead matter, and that, for the purposes of scientific physics, no conception of an "end"
is useful, nor can any motion, in scientific strictness, be treated as other than relative. 
Aristotle rejects the void, as maintained by Leucippus and Democritus. He then passes on to a
rather curious discussion of time. It might, he says, be maintained that time does not exist, since it
is composed of past and future, of which one no longer exists while the other does not yet exist.
This view, however, he rejects. Time, he says, is motion that admits of numeration. (It is not clear
why he thinks numeration essential.) We may fairly ask, he continues, whether time could exist
without the soul, since there cannot be anything to count unless there is some one to count, and
time involves numeration. It seems that he thinks of time as so many hours or days or years. Some
things, he adds, are eternal, in the sense of not being in time; presumably he is thinking of such
things as numbers. 
There always has been motion, and there always will be; for there cannot be time without motion,
and all are agreed that time is uncreated, except Plato. On this point, Christian followers of
Aristotle were obliged to dissent from him, since the Bible tells us that the universe had a
beginning. 
The Physics ends with the argument for an unmoved mover, which we considered in connection
with the Metaphysics. There is one unmoved mover, which directly causes a circular motion.
Circular motion is the primary kind, and the only kind which can be continuous and infinite. The
first mover has no parts or magnitude and is at the circumference of the world. 
Having reached this conclusion, we pass on to the heavens. 
The treatise On the Heavens sets forth a pleasant and simple theory. Things below the moon are
subject to generation and decay; from the moon upwards, everything is ungenerated and
indestructible. The earth, which is spherical, is at the centre of the universe. In the sublunary
sphere, everything is composed of the four elements, earth, water, air, and fire; but there is a fifth
element, of which the heavenly bodies are composed. The natural movement of the terrestrial
elements is rectilinear, but that of the fifth element is circular. The 
-206- 

heavens are perfectly spherical, and the upper regions are more divine than the lower. The stars
and planets are not composed of fire, but of the fifth element; their motion is due to that of spheres
to which they are attached. (All this appears in poetical form in Dante Paradiso.) 
The four terrestrial elements are not eternal, but are generated out of each other--fire is absolutely
light, in the sense that its natural motion is upward; earth is absolutely heavy. Air is relatively
light, and water is relatively heavy. 
This theory provided many difficulties for later ages. Comets, which were recognized as
destructible, had to be assigned to the sublunary sphere, but in the seventeenth century it was
found that they describe orbits round the sun, and are very seldom as near as the moon. Since the
natural motion of terrestrial bodies is rectilinear, it was held that a projectile fired horizontally will
move horizontally for a time, and then suddenly begin to fall vertically. Galileo's discovery that a
projectile moves in a parabola shocked his Aristotelian colleagues. Copernicus, Kepler, and
Galileo had to combat Aristotle as well as the Bible in establishing the view that the earth is not
the centre of the universe, but rotates once a day and goes round the sun once a year. 
To come to a more general matter: Aristotelian physics is incompatible with Newton "First Law
of Motion," originally enunciated by Galileo. This law states that every body, left to itself, will, if
already in motion, continue to move in a straight line with uniform velocity. Thus outside causes
are required, not to account for motion, but to account for change of motion, either in velocity or
in direction. Circular motion, which Aristotle thought "natural" for the heavenly bodies, involves a
continual change in the direction of motion, and therefore requires a force directed towards the
centre of the circle, as in Newton's law of gravitation. 
Finally: The view that the heavenly bodies are eternal and incorruptible has had to be abandoned.
The sun and stars have long lives, but do not live for ever. They are born from a nebula, and in the
end they either explode or die of cold. Nothing in the visible world is exempt from change and
decay; the Aristotelian belief to the contrary, though accepted by medieval Christians, is a product
of the pagan worship of sun and moon and planets. 
-207- 
