of physics. This assumption, however, is by no means logically necessary. If it is abandoned,
percepts cease to be in any important sense "subjective," since there is nothing with which to
contrast them. 
The "thing-in-itself" was an awkward element in Kant's philosophy, and was abandoned by his
immediate successors, who accordingly fell into something very like solipsism. Kant's
inconsistencies were such as to make it inevitable that philosophers who were influenced by him
should develop rapidly either in the empirical or in the absolutist direction; it was, in fact, in the
latter direction that German philosophy moved until after the death of Hegel. 
Kant's immediate successor, Fichte ( 1762-1814), abandoned "things in themselves," and carried
subjectivism to a point which seems almost to involve a kind of insanity. He holds that the Ego is
the only ultimate reality, and that it exists because it posits itself; the non-Ego, which has a
subordinate reality, also exists only because the Ego posits it. Fichte is not important as a pure
philosopher, but as the theoretical founder of German nationalism, by his Addresses to the
German Nation ( 1807-8), which were intended to rouse the Germans to resistance to Napoleon
after the battle of Jena. The Ego as a metaphysical concept easily became confused with the
empirical Fichte; since the Ego was German, it followed that the Germans were superior to all
other nations. "To have character and to be a German," says Fichte, "undoubtedly mean the same
thing." On this basis he worked out a whole philosophy of nationalistic totalitarianism, which had
great influence in Germany. 
His immediate successor Schelling ( 1775-1854) was more amiable, but not less subjective. He
was closely associated with the German romantics; philosophically, though famous in his day, he
is not important. The important development from Kant's philosophy was that of Hegel. 
-718- 
CHAPTER XXI Currents of Thought in the Nineteenth Century 
THE intellectual life of the nineteenth century was more complex than that of any previous age.
This was due to several causes. First: the area concerned was larger than ever before; America and
Russia made important contributions, and Europe became more aware than formerly of Indian
philosophies, both ancient and modern. Second: science, which had been a chief source of novelty
since the seventeenth century, made new conquests, especially in geology, biology, and organic
chemistry. Third: machine production profoundly altered the social structure, and gave men a new
conception of their powers in relation to the physical environment. Fourth: a profound revolt, both
philosophical and political, against traditional systems in thought, in politics, and in economics,
gave rise to attacks upon many beliefs and institutions that had hitherto been regarded as
unassailable. This revolt had two very different forms, one romantic, the other rationalistic. (I am
using these words in a liberal sense.) The romantic revolt passes from Byron, Schopenhauer, and
Nietzsche to Mussolini and Hitler; the rationalistic revolt begins with the French philosophers of
the Revolution, passes on, somewhat softened, to the philosophical radicals in England, then
acquires a deeper form in Marx and issues in Soviet Russia. 
The intellectual predominance of Germany is a new factor, beginning with Kant. Leibniz, though
a German, wrote almost always in Latin or French, and was very little influenced by Germany in
his philosophy. German idealism after Kant, as well as later German philosophy, was, on the
contrary, profoundly influenced by German history; much of what seems strange in German
philosophical specu- 
-719- 

lation reflects the state of mind of a vigorous nation deprived, by historical accidents, of its natural
share of power. Germany had owed its international position to the Holy Roman Empire, but the
Emperor had gradually lost control of his nominal subjects. The last powerful Emperor was
Charles V, and he owed his power to his possessions in Spain and the Low Countries. The
Reformation and the Thirty Years' War destroyed what had been left of German unity, leaving a
number of petty principalities which were at the mercy of France. In the eighteenth century only
one German state, Prussia, had successfully resisted the French; that is why Frederick was called
the Great. But Prussia itself had failed to stand against Napoleon, being utterly defeated in the
battle of Jena. The resurrection of Prussia under Bismarck appeared as a revival of the heroic past
of Alaric, Charlemagne, and Barbarossa. (To Germans, Charlemagne is a German, not a
Frenchman.) Bismarck showed his sense of history when he said, "We will not go to Canossa." 
Prussia, however, though politically predominant, was culturally less advanced than much of
Western Germany; this explains why many eminent Germans, including Goethe, did not regret
Napoleon's success at Jena. Germany, at the beginning of the nineteenth century, presented an
extraordinary cultural and economic diversity. In East Prussia serfdom still survived; the rural
aristocracy were largely immersed in bucolic ignorance, and the labourers were completely
without even the rudiments of education. Western Germany, on the other hand, had been in part
subject to Rome in antiquity; it had been under French influence since the seventeenth century; it
had been occupied by French revolutionary armies, and had acquired institutions as liberal as
those of France. Some of the princes were intelligent, patrons of the arts and sciences, imitating
Renaissance princes in their courts; the most notable example was Weimar, where the Grand
Duke was Goethe's patron. The princes were, naturally, for the most part opposed to German
unity, since it would destroy their independence. They were therefore anti-patriotic, and so were
many of the eminent men who depended on them, to whom Napoleon appeared the missionary of
a higher culture than that of Germany. 
Gradually, during the nineteenth century, the culture of Protestant Germany became increasingly
Prussian. Frederick the Great, as a free-thinker and an admirer of French philosophy, had
struggled to 
-720- 

make Berlin a cultural centre; the Berlin Academy had as its perpetual President an eminent
Frenchman, Maupertuis, who, however, unfortunately became the victim of Voltaire's deadly
ridicule. Frederick's endeavours, like those of the other enlightened despots of the time, did not
include economic or political reform; all that was really achieved was a claque of hired
intellectuals. After his death, it was again in Western Germany that most of the men of culture
were to be found. 
German philosophy was more connected with Prussia than were German literature and art. Kant
was a subject of Frederick the Great; Fichte and Hegel were professors at Berlin. Kant was little
influenced by Prussia; indeed he got into trouble with the Prussian Government for his liberal
theology. But both Fichte and Hegel were philosophic mouthpieces of Prussia, and did much to
prepare the way for the later identification of German patriotism with admiration for Prussia.
Their work in this respect was carried on by the great German historians, particularly by
Mommsen and Treitschke. Bismarck finally persuaded the German nation to accept unification
under Prussia, and thus gave the victory to the less internationally minded elements in German
culture. 
Throughout the whole period after the death of Hegel, most academic philosophy remained
traditional, and therefore not very important. British empiricist philosophy was dominant in
England until near the end of the century, and in France until a somewhat earlier time; then,
gradually, Kant and Hegel conquered the universities of France and England, so far as their
teachers of technical philosophy were concerned. The general educated public, however, was very
little affected by this movement, which had few adherents among men of science. The writers who
carried on the academic tradition--John Stuart Mill on the empiricist side, Lotze, Sigwart, Bradley,
and Bosanquet on the side of German idealism--were none of them quite in the front rank among
philosophers, that is to say, they were not the equals of the men whose systems they, on the whole,
adopted. Academic philosophy has often before been out of touch with the most vigorous thought
of the age, for instance, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, when it was still mainly
scholastic. Whenever this happens, the historian of philosophy is less concerned with the
professors than with the unprofessional heretics. 
-721- 

Most of the philosophers of the French Revolution combined science with beliefs associated with
Rousseau. Helvétius and Condorcet may be regarded as typical in their combination of
rationalism and enthusiasm. 
Helvétius ( 1715-1771) had the honour of having his book De l'Esprit ( 1758) condemned by
the Sorbonne and burnt by the hangman. Bentham read him in 1769 and immediately determined
to devote his life to the principles of legislation, saying: "What Bacon was to the physical world,
Helvétius was to the moral. The moral world has therefore had its Bacon, but its Newton is still
to come." James Mill took Helvétius as his guide in the education of his son John Stuart. 
Following Locke's doctrine that the mind is a tabula rasa, Helvétius considered the differences
between individuals entirely due to differences of education: in every individual, his talents and
his virtues are the effect of his instruction. Genius, he maintains, is often due to chance: if
Shakespeare had not been caught poaching, he would have been a wool merchant. His interest in
legislation comes from the doctrine that the principal instructors of adolescence are the forms of
government and the consequent manners and customs. Men are born ignorant, not stupid; they are
made stupid by education. 
In ethics, Helvétius was a utilitarian; he considered pleasure to be the good. In religion, he was
a deist, and vehemently anti-clerical. In theory of knowledge, he adopted a simplified version of
Locke: "Enlightened by Locke, we know that it is to the sense-organs we owe our ideas, and
consequently our mind." Physical sensibility, he says, is the sole cause of our actions, our
thoughts, our passions, and our sociability. He strongly disagrees with Rousseau as to the value of
knowledge, which he rates very highly. 
His doctrine is optimistic, since only a perfect education is needed to make men perfect. There is a
suggestion that it would be easy to find a perfect education if the priests were got out of the way. 
Condorcet ( 1743-1794) has opinions similar to those of Helvétius, but more influenced by
Rousseau. The rights of man, he says, are all deduced from this one truth, that he is a sensitive
being, capable of making reasonings and acquiring moral ideas, from which it follows that men
can no longer be divided into rulers and subjects, liars and dupes. "These principles, for which the
generous Sydney gave his life and to which Locke attached the authority of his name, were 
-722- 

afterwards developed more precisely by Rousseau." Locke, he says, first showed the limits of
human knowledge. His "method soon became that of all philosophers, and it is by applying it to
morals, politics, and economics, that they have succeeded in pursuing in these sciences a road
almost as sure as that of the natural sciences." 
Condorcet much admires the American Revolution. "Simple common sense taught the inhabitants
of the British Colonies that Englishmen born on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean had precisely
the same rights as those born on the meridian of Greenwich." The United States Constitution, he
says, is based on natural rights, and the American Revolution made the rights of man known to all
Europe, from the Neva to the Guadalquivir. The principles of the French Revolution, however, are
"purer, more precise, deeper than those that guided the Americans." These words were written
while he was in hiding from Robespierre; shortly afterwards, he was caught and imprisoned. He
died in prison, but the manner of his death is uncertain. 
He was a believer in the equality of women. He was also the inventor of Malthus's theory of
population, which, however, had not for him the gloomy consequences that it had for Malthus,
because he coupled it with the necessity of birth control. Malthus's father was a disciple of
Condorcet, and it was in this way that Malthus came to know of the theory. 
Condorcet is even more enthusiastic and optimistic than Helvétius. He believes that, through
the spread of the principles of the French Revolution, all the major social ills will soon disappear.
Perhaps he was fortunate in not living beyond 1794. 
The doctrines of the French revolutionary philosophers, made less enthusiastic and much more
precise, were brought to England by the philosophical radicals, of whom Bentham was the
recognized chief. Bentham was, at first, almost exclusively interested in law; gradually, as he grew
older, his interests widened and his opinions became more subversive. After 1808, he was a
republican, a believer in the equality of women, an enemy of imperialism, and an uncompromising
democrat. Some of these opinions he owed to James Mill. Both believed in the omnipotence of
education. Bentham's adoption of the principle of "the greatest happiness of the greatest number"
was no doubt due to democratic feeling, but it involved opposition to the doctrine of the rights of
man, which he bluntly characterized as "nonsense." 
-723- 

The philosophical radicals differed from men like Helvétius and Condorcet in many ways.
Temperamentally, they were patient and fond of working out their theories in practical detail.
They attached great importance to economics, which they believed themselves to have developed
as a science. Tendencies to enthusiasm, which existed in Bentham and John Stuart Mill, but not in
Malthus or James Mill, were severely held in check by this "science," and particularly by
Malthus's gloomy version of the theory of population, according to which most wage-earners must
always, except just after a pestilence, earn the smallest amount that will keep them and their
families alive. Another great difference between the Benthamites and their French predecessors
was that in industrial England there was violent conflict between employers and wage-earners,
which gave rise to tradeunionism and socialism. In this conflict the Benthamites, broadly
speaking, sided with the employers against the working class. Their last representative, John
Stuart Mill, however, gradually ceased to give adherence to his father's stern tenets, and became,
as he grew older, less and less hostile to socialism, and less and less convinced of the eternal truth
of classical economics. According to his autobiography, this softening process was begun by the
reading of the romantic poets. 
The Benthamites, though at first revolutionary in a rather mild way, gradually ceased to be so,
partly through success in converting the British government to some of their views, partly through
opposition to the growing strength of socialism and trade-unionism. Men who were in revolt
against tradition, as already mentioned, were of two kinds, rationalistic and romantic, though in
men like Condorcet both elements were combined. The Benthamites were almost wholly
rationalistic, and so were the Socialists who rebelled against them as well as against the existing
economic order. This movement does not acquire a complete philosophy until we come to Marx,
who will be considered in a later chapter. 
The romantic form of revolt is very different from the rationalist form, though both are derived
from the French Revolution and the philosophers who immediately preceded it. The romantic
form is to be seen in Byron in an unphilosophical dress, but in Schopenhauer and Nietzsche it has
learnt the language of philosophy. It tends to emphasize the will at the expense of the intellect, to
be impatient of 
-724- 

chains of reasoning, and to glorify violence of certain kinds. In practical politics it is important as
an ally of nationalism. In tendency, if not always in fact, it is definitely hostile to what is
commonly called reason, and tends to be anti-scientific. Some of its most extreme forms are to be
found among Russian anarchists, but in Russia it was the rationalist form of revolt that finally
prevailed. It was Germany, always more susceptible to romanticism than any other country, that
provided a governmental outlet for the anti-rational philosophy of naked will. 
So far, the philosophies that we have been considering have had an inspiration which was
traditional, literary, or political. But there were two other sources of philosophical opinion,
namely science and machine production. The second of these began its theoretical influence with
Marx, and has grown gradually more important ever since. The first has been important since the
seventeenth century, but took new forms during the nineteenth century. 
What Galileo and Newton were to the seventeenth century, Darwin was to the nineteenth.
Darwin's theory had two parts. On the one hand, there was the doctrine of evolution, which
maintained that the different forms of life had developed gradually from a common ancestry. This
doctrine, which is now generally accepted, was not new. It had been maintained by Lamarck and
by Darwin's grandfather Erasmus, not to mention Anaximander. Darwin supplied an immense
mass of evidence for the doctrine, and in the second part of his theory believed himself to have
discovered the cause of evolution. He thus gave to the doctrine a popularity and a scientific force
which it had not previously possessed, but he by no means originated it. 
The second part of Darwin's theory was the struggle for existence and the survival of the fittest.
All animals and plants multiply faster than nature can provide for them; therefore in each
generation many perish before the age for reproducing themselves. What determines which will
survive? To some extent, no doubt, sheer luck, but there is another cause of more importance.
Animals and plants are, as a rule, not exactly like their parents, but differ slightly by excess or
defect in every measurable characteristic. In a given environment, members of the same species
compete for survival, and those best adapted to the environment have the best chance. Therefore
among chance variations those that are favourable will preponderate among adults in 
-725- 

each generation. Thus from age to age deer run more swiftly, cats stalk their prey more silently,
and giraffes' necks become longer. Given enough time, this mechanism, so Darwin contended,
could account for the whole long development from the protozoa to homo sapiens. 
This part of Darwin's theory has been much disputed, and is regarded by most biologists as subject
to many important qualifications. That, however, is not what most concerns the historian of
nineteenth-century ideas. From the historical point of view, what is interesting is Darwin's
extension to the whole of life of the economics that characterized the philosophical radicals. The
motive force of evolution, according to him, is a kind of biological economics in a world of free
competition. It was Malthus's doctrine of population, extended to the world of animals and plants,
that suggested to Darwin the struggle for existence and the survival of the fittest as the source of
evolution. 
Darwin himself was a liberal, but his theories had consequences in some degree inimical to
traditional liberalism. The doctrine that all men are born equal, and that the differences between
adults are due wholly to education, was incompatible with his emphasis on congenital differences
between members of the same species. If, as Lamarck held, and as Darwin himself was willing to
concede up to a point, acquired characteristics were inherited, this opposition to such views as
those of Helvétius could have been somewhat softened; but it has appeared that only congenital
characteristics are inherited, apart from certain not very important exceptions. Thus the congenital
differences between men acquire fundamental importance. 
There is a further consequence of the theory of evolution, which is independent of the particular
mechanism suggested by Darwin. If men and animals have a common ancestry, and if men
developed by such slow stages that there were creatures which we should not know whether to
classify as human or not, the question arises: at what stage in evolution did men, or their semi-
human ancestors, begin to be all equal? Would Pithecanthropus erectus, if he had been properly
educated, have done work as good as Newton's? Would the Piltdown Man have written
Shakespeare's poetry if there had been anybody to convict him of poaching? A resolute egalitarian
who answers these questions in the affirmative will find himself forced to regard apes as the
equals of human beings. And why stop with apes? 
-726- 

I do not see how he is to resist an argument in favour of Votes for Oysters. An adherent of
evolution may maintain that not only the doctrine of the equality of all men, but also that of the
rights of man, must be condemned as unbiological, since it makes too emphatic a distinction
between men and other animals. 
There is, however, another aspect of liberalism which was greatly strengthened by the doctrine of
evolution, namely the belief in progress. So long as the state of the world allowed optimism,
evolution was welcomed by liberals, both on this ground and because it gave new arguments
against orthodox theology. Marx himself, though his. doctrines are in some respects pre-
Darwinian, wished to dedicate his book to Darwin. 
The prestige of biology caused men whose thinking was influenced by science to apply biological
rather than mechanistic categories to the world. Everything was supposed to be evolving, and it
was easy to imagine an immanent goal. In spite of Darwin, many men considered that evolution
justified a belief in cosmic purpose. The conception of organism came to be thought the key to
both scientific and philosophical explanations of natural laws, and the atomic thinking of the
eighteenth century came to be regarded as out of date. This point of view has at last influenced
even theoretical physics. In politics it leads naturally to emphasis upon the community as opposed
to the individual. This is in harmony with the growing power of the State; also with nationalism,
which can appeal to the Darwinian doctrine of survival of the fittest applied, not to individuals,
but to nations. But here we are passing into the region of extra-scientific views suggested to a
large public by scientific doctrines imperfectly understood. 
While biology has militated against a mechanistic view of the world, modern economic technique
has had an opposite effect. Until about the end of the eighteenth century, scientific technique, as
opposed to scientific doctrines, had no important effect upon opinion. It was only with the rise of
industrialism that technique began to affect men's thought. And even then, for a long time, the
effect was more or less indirect. Men who produce philosophical theories are, as a rule, brought
into very little contact with machinery. The romantics noticed and hated the ugliness that
industrialism was producing in places hitherto beautiful, and the vulgarity (as they considered it)
of those who had made money in "trade." This led them into an 
-727- 

opposition to the middle class which sometimes brought them into something like an alliance with
the champions of the proletariat. Engels praised Carlyle, not perceiving that what Carlyle desired
was not the emancipation of wage-earners, but their subjection to the kind of masters they had had
in the Middle Ages. The Socialists welcomed industrialism, but wished to free industrial workers
from subjection to the power of employers. They were influenced by industrialism in the problems
that they considered, but not much in the ideas that they employed in the solution of their
problems. 
The most important effect of machine production on the imaginative picture of the world is an
immense increase in the sense of human power. This is only an acceleration of a process which
began before the dawn of history, when men diminished their fear of wild animals by the
invention of weapons and their fear of starvation by the invention of agriculture. But the
acceleration has been so great as to produce a radically new outlook in those who wield the
powers that modern technique has created. In old days, mountains and waterfalls were natural
phenomena; now, an inconvenient mountain can be abolished and a convenient waterfall can be
created. In old days, there were deserts and fertile regions; now, the desert can, if people think it
worth while, be made to blossom like the rose, while fertile regions are turned into deserts by
insufficiently scientific optimists. In old days, peasants lived as their parents and grandparents had
lived, and believed as their parents and grandparents had believed; not all the power of the Church
could eradicate pagan ceremonies, which had to be given a Christian dress by being connected
with local saints. Now the authorities can decree what the children of peasants shall learn in
school, and can transform the mentality of agriculturists in a generation; one gathers that this has
been achieved in Russia. 
There thus arises, among those who direct affairs or are in touch with those who do so, a new
belief in power: first, the power of man in his conflicts with nature, and then the power of rulers as
against the human beings whose beliefs and aspirations they seek to control by scientific
propaganda, especially education. The result is a diminution of fixity; no change seems
impossible. Nature is raw material; so is that part of the human race which does not effectively
participate in government. There are certain old conceptions which represent men's belief in the
limits of human power; of these the two chief are 
-728- 
