CHAPTER XXIV Schopenhauer 
SCHOPENHAUER ( 1788-1860) is in many ways peculiar among philosophers. He is a
pessimist, whereas almost all the others are in some sense optimists. He is not fully academic, like
Kant and Hegel, nor yet completely outside the academic tradition. He dislikes Christianity,
preferring the religions of India, both Hinduism and Buddhism. He is a man of wide culture, quite
as much interested in art as in ethics. He is unusually free from nationalism, and as much at home
with English and French writers as with those of his own country. His appeal has always been less
to professional philosophers than to artistic and literary people in search of a philosophy that they
could believe. He began the emphasis on Will which is characteristic of much nineteenth- and
twentieth-century philosophy; but for him Will, though metaphysically fundamental, is ethically
evil--an opposition only possible for a pessimist. He acknowledges three sources of his
philosophy, Kant, Plato, and the Upanishads, but I do not think he owes as much to Plato as he
thinks he does. His outlook has a certain temperamental affinity with that of the Hellenistic age; it
is tired and valetudinarian, valuing peace more than victory, and quietism more than attempts at
reform, which he regards as inevitably futile. 
Both his parents belonged to prominent commercial families in Danzig, where he was born. His
father was a Voltairian, who regarded England as the land of liberty and intelligence. In common
with most of the leading citizens of Danzig, he hated the encroachments of Prussia on the
independence of the free city, and was indignant when it was annexed to Prussia in 1793-so
indignant that he removed to Hamburg, at considerable pecuniary loss. Schopenhauer lived there
with his father from 1793 to 1797; then he spent two years in Paris, at the end of which his father
was pleased to find that the 
-753- 

boy had nearly forgotten German. In 1803 he was put in a boardingschool in England, where he
hated the cant and hypocrisy. Two years later, to please his father, he became a clerk in a
commercial house in Hamburg, but he loathed the prospect of a business career, and longed for a
literary and academic life. This was made possible by his father's death, probably by suicide; his
mother was willing that he should abandon commerce for school and university. It might be
supposed that he would, in consequence, have preferred her to his father, but the exact opposite
happened: he disliked his mother, and retained an affectionate memory of his father. 
Schopenhauer's mother was a lady of literary aspirations, who settled in Weimar two weeks before
the battle of Jena. There she kept a literary salon, wrote books, and enjoyed friendships with men
of culture. She had little affection for her son, and a keen eye for his faults. She warned him
against bombast and empty pathos; he was annoyed by her philanderings. When he came of age he
inherited a modest competence; after this, he and his mother gradually found each other more and
more intolerable. His low opinion of women is no doubt due, at least in part, to his quarrels with
his mother. 
Already at Hamburg he had come under the influence of the romantics, especially Tieck, Novalis,
and Hoffmann, from whom he learnt to admire Greece and to think ill of the Hebraic elements in
Christianity. Another romantic, Friedrich Schlegel, confirmed him in his admiration of Indian
philosophy. In the year in which he came of age ( 1809), he went to the university of Göttingen,
where he learnt to admire Kant. Two years later he went to Berlin, where he studied mainly
science; he heard Fichte lecture, but despised him. He remained indifferent throughout the
excitement of the war of liberation. In 1819 he became a Privatdozent at Berlin, and had the
conceit to put his lectures at the same hour as Hegel's; having failed to lure away Hegel's hearers,
he soon ceased to lecture. In the end he settled down to the life of an old bachelor in Dresden. He
kept a poodle named Atma (the world-soul), walked two hours every day, smoked a long pipe,
read the London Times, and employed correspondents to hunt up evidences of his fame. He was
anti-democratic, and hated the revolution of 1848; he believed in spiritualism and magic; in his
study he had a bust of Kant and a bronze Buddha. In his manner of life he tried to imitate Kant
except as regards early rising. 
-754- 

His principal work, The World as Will and Idea, was published at the end of 1818. He believed it
to be of great importance, and went so far as to say that some paragraphs in it had been dictated by
the Holy Ghost. To his great mortification, it fell completely flat. In 1844 he persuaded the
publisher to bring out a second edition; but it was not till some years later that he began to receive
some of the recognition for which he longed. 
Schopenhauer's system is an adaptation of Kant's, but one that emphasizes quite different aspects
of the Critique from those emphasized by Fichte or Hegel. They got rid of the thing-in-itself, and
thus made knowledge metaphysically fundamental. Schopenhauer retained the thing-in-itself, but
identified it with will. He held that what appears to perception as my body is really my will. There
was more to be said for this view as a development of Kant than most Kantians were willing to
recognize. Kant had maintained that a study of the moral law can take us behind phenomena, and
give us knowledge which sense-perception cannot give; he also maintained that the moral law is
essentially concerned with the will. The difference between a good man and a bad man is, for
Kant, a difference in the world of thingsin-themselves, and is also a difference as to volitions. It
follows that, for Kant, volitions must belong to the real world, not to the world of phenomena.
The phenomenon corresponding to a volition is a bodily movement; that is why, according to
Schopenhauer, the body is the appearance of which will is the reality. 
But the will which is behind phenomena cannot consist of a number of different volitions. Both
time and space, according to Kant--and in this Schopenhauer agrees with him--belong only to
phenomena; the thing-in-itself is not in space or time. My will, therefore, in the sense in which it
is real, cannot be dated, nor can it be composed of separate acts of will, because it is space and
time that are the source of plurality--the "principle of individuation," to use the scholastic phrase
which Schopenhauer prefers. My will, therefore, is one and timeless. Nay, more, it is to be
identified with the will of the whole universe; my separateness is an illusion, resulting from my
subjective apparatus of spatio-temporal perception. What is real is one vast will, appearing in the
whole course of nature, animate and inanimate alike. 
So far, we might expect Schopenhauer to identify his cosmic will with God, and teach a
pantheistic doctrine not unlike Spinoza's, in 
-755- 

which virtue would consist in conformity to the divine will. But at this point his pessimism leads
to a different development. The cosmic will is wicked; will, altogether, is wicked, or at any rate is
the source of all our endless suffering. Suffering is essential to all life, and is increased by every
increase of knowledge. Will has no fixed end, which if achieved would bring contentment.
Although death must conquer in the end, we pursue our futile purposes, "as we blow out a soap-
bubble as long and as large as possible, although we know perfectly well that it will burst." There
is no such thing as happiness, for an unfulfilled wish causes pain, and attainment brings only
satiety. Instinct urges men to procreation, which brings into existence a new occasion for suffering
and death; that is why shame is associated with the sexual act. Suicide is useless; the doctrine of
transmigration, even if not literally true, conveys truth in the form of a myth. 
All this is very sad, but there is a way out, and it was discovered in India. 
The best of myths is that of Nirvana (which Schopenhauer interprets as extinction). This, he
agrees, is contrary to Christian doctrine, but "the ancient wisdom of the human race will not be
displaced by what happened in Galilee." The cause of suffering is intensity of will; the less we
exercise will, the less we shall suffer. And here knowledge turns out to be useful after all,
provided it is knowledge of a certain sort. The distinction between one man and another is part of
the phenomenal world, and disappears when the world is seen truly. To the good man, the veil of
Maya (illusion) has become transparent; he sees that all things are one, and that the distinction
between himself and another is only apparent. He reaches this insight by love, which is always
sympathy, and has to do with the pain of others. When the veil of Maya is lifted, a man takes on
the suffering of the whole world. In the good man, knowledge of the whole quiets all volition; his
will turns away from life and denies his own nature. "There arises within him a horror of the
nature of which his own phenomenal existence is an expression, the kernel and inner nature of
that world which is recognized as full of misery." 
Hence Schopenhauer is led to complete agreement, at least as regards practice, with ascetic
mysticism. Eckhard and Angelus Silesius are better than the New Testament. There are some good
things in orthodox Christianity, notably the doctrine of original sin as preached, 
-756- 

against "the vulgar Pelagianism," by Saint Augustine and Luther; but the Gospels are sadly
deficient in metaphysics. Buddhism, he says, is the highest religion; and his ethical doctrines are
orthodox throughout Asia, except where the "detestable doctrine of Islam" prevails. 
The good man will practise complete chastity, voluntary poverty, fasting, and self-torture. In all
things he will aim at breaking down his individual will. But he does not do this, as do the Western
mystics, to achieve harmony with God; no such positive good is sought. The good that is sought is
wholly and entirely negative: 
"We must banish the dark impression of that nothingness which we discern behind all virtue and
holiness as their final goal, and which we fear as children fear the dark; we must not even evade it
like the Indians, through myths and meaningless words, such as reabsorption in Brahma or the
Nirvana of the Buddhists. Rather do we freely acknowledge that what remains after the entire
abolition of win is for all those who are still full of will certainly nothing; but, conversely, to those
in whom the will has turned and has denied itself, this our world, which is so real, with all its suns
and milky ways--is nothing." 
There is a vague suggestion here that the saint sees something positive which other men do not
see, but there is nowhere a hint as to what this is, and I think the suggestion is only rhetorical. The
world and all its phenomena, Schopenhauer says, are only the objectification of will. With the
surrender of the will, 
". . . all those phenomena are also abolished; that constant strain and effort without end and
without rest at all the grades of objectivity, in which and through which the world consists; the
multifarious forms succeeding each other in gradation; the whole manifestation of the will; and,
finally, also the universal forms of this manifestation, time and space, and also its last
fundamental form, subject and object; all are abolished. No will: no idea, no world. Before us
there is certainly only nothingness." 
We cannot interpret this except as meaning that the saint's purpose is to come as near as possible
to non-existence, which, for some reason never clearly explained, he cannot achieve by suicide.
Why the saint is to be preferred to a man who is always drunk is not very easy to see; perhaps
Schopenhauer thought the sober moments were bound to be sadly frequent. 
Schopenhauer's gospel of resignation is not very consistent and not 
-757- 

very sincere. The mystics to whom he appeals believed in contemplation; in the Beatific Vision
the most profound kind of knowledge was to be achieved, and this kind of knowledge was the
supreme good. Ever since Parmenides, the delusive knowledge of appearance was contrasted
with another kind of knowledge, not with something of a wholly different kind. Christianity
teaches that in knowledge of God standeth our eternal life. But Schopenhauer will have none of
this. He agrees that what commonly passes for knowledge belongs to the realm of Maya, but
when we pierce the veil, we behold not God, but Satan, the wicked omnipotent will, perpetually
busied in weaving a web of suffering for the torture of its creatures. Terrified by the Diabolic
Vision, the sage cries "Avaunt!" and seeks refuge in non-existence. It is an insult to the mystics
to claim them as believers in this mythology. And the suggestion that, without achieving
complete non-existence, the sage may yet live a life having some value, is not possible to
reconcile with Schopenhauer's pessimism. So long as the sage exists, he exists because he
retains will, which is evil. He may diminish the quantity of evil by weakening his will, but he
can never acquire any positive good. 
Nor is the doctrine sincere, if we may judge by Schopenhauer's life. He habitually dined well, at
a good restaurant; he had many trivial love-affairs, which were sensual but not passionate; he
was exceedingly quarrelsome and unusually avaricious. On one occasion he was annoyed by an
elderly seamstress who was talking to a friend outside the door of his apartment. He threw her
downstairs, causing her permanent injury. She obtained a court order compelling him to pay her
a certain sum (15 thalers) every quarter as long as she lived. When at last she died, after twenty
years, he noted in his accountbook: "Obit anus, abit onus."* It is hard to find in his life
evidences of any virtue except kindness to animals, which he carried to the point of objecting to
vivisection in the interests of science. In all other respects he was completely selfish. It is
difficult to believe that a man who was profoundly convinced of the virtue of asceticism and
resignation would never have made any attempt to embody his convictions in his practice. 
Historically, two things are important about Schopenhauer: his 
____________________ 
* "The old woman dies, the burden departs." 
-758- 
