It is true that the conservation of energy is a law dealing with velocities, not accelerations. But in
calculations which use this law it is still accelerations that have to be employed. 
As for the changes introduced by quantum mechanics, they are very profound, but still, to some
degree, a matter of controversy and uncertainty. 
There is one change from the Newtonian philosophy which must be mentioned now, and that is
the abandonment of absolute space and time. The reader will remember a mention of this question
in connection with Democritus. Newton believed in a space composed of points, and a time
composed of instants, which had an existence independent of the bodies and events that occupied
them. As regards space, he had an empirical argument to support his view, namely that physical
phenomena enable us to distinguish absolute rotation. If the water in a bucket is rotated, it climbs
up the sides and is depressed in the centre; but if the bucket is rotated while the water is not, there
is no such effect. Since his day, the experiment of Foucault's pendulum has been devised, giving
what has been considered a demonstration of the earth's rotation. Even on the most modern views,
the question of absolute rotation presents difficulties. If all motion is relative, the difference
between the hypothesis that the earth rotates and the hypothesis that the heavens revolve is purely
verbal; it is no more than the difference between "John is the father of James" and "James is the
son of John." But if the heavens revolve, the stars move faster than light, which is considered
impossible. It cannot be said that the modern answers to this difficulty are completely satisfying,
but they are sufficiently satisfying to cause almost all physicists to accept the view that motion and
space are purely relative. This, combined with the amalgamation of space and time into space-
time, has considerably altered our view of the universe from that which resulted from the work of
Galileo and Newton. But of this, as of quantum theory, I will say no more at this time. 
-540- 
CHAPTER VII Francis Bacon 
FRANCIS BACON ( 1561-1626), although his philosophy is in many ways unsatisfactory, has
permanent importance as the founder of modern inductive method and the pioneer in the attempt
at logical systematization of scientic procedure. 
He was a son of Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and his aunt was the wife of
Sir William Cecil, afterwards Lord Burghley; he thus grew up in the atmosphere of state affairs.
He entered Parliament at the age of twenty-three, and became adviser to Essex. None the less,
when Essex fell from favour he helped in his prosecution. For this he has been severely blamed:
Lytton Strachey, for example, in his Elizabeth and Essex, represents Bacon as a monster of
treachery and ingratitude. This is quite unjust. He worked with Essex while Essex was loyal, but
abandoned him when continued loyalty to him would have been treasonable; in this there was
nothing that even the most rigid moralist of the age could condemn. 
In spite of his abandonment of Essex, he was never completely in favour during the lifetime of
Queen Elizabeth. With James's accession, however, his prospects improved. In 1617 he acquired
his father's office of Keeper of the Great Seal, and in 1618 he became Lord Chancellor. But after
he had held this great position for only two years, he was prosecuted for accepting bribes from
litigants. He admitted the truth of accusation, pleading only that presents never influenced his
decision. As to that, any one may form his own opinion, since there can be no evidence as to the
decisions that Bacon would have come to in other circumstances. He was condemned to a fine of
£40,000, to imprisonment in the Tower during the king's pleasure, to perpetual banishment from
court and inability to hold office. This sentence was only very partially executed. He was not
forced to pay the fine, and he was kept in the Tower for only four days. But he was 
-541- 

compelled to abandon public life, and to spend the remainder of his days in writing important
books. 
The ethics of the legal profession, in those days, were somewhat lax. Almost every judge accepted
presents, usually from both sides. Nowadays we think it atrocious for a judge to take bribes, but
even more atrocious, after taking them, to decide against the givers of them. In those days,
presents were a matter of course, and a judge showed his "virtue" by not being influenced by
them. Bacon was condemned as an incident in a party squabble, not because he was exceptionally
guilty. He was not a man of outstanding moral eminence, like his forerunner Sir Thomas More,
but he was also not exceptionally wicked. Morally, he was an average man, no better and no
worse than the bulk of his contemporaries. 
After five years spent in retirement, he died of a chill caught while experimenting on refrigeration
by stuffing a chicken full of snow. 
Bacon's most important book, The Advancement of Learning, is in many ways remarkably
modern. He is commonly regarded as the originator of the saying "Knowledge is power," and
though he may have had predecessors who said the same thing, he said it with new emphasis. The
whole basis of his philosophy was practical: to give mankind mastery over the forces of nature by
means of scientific discoveries and inventions. He held that philosophy should be kept separate
from theology, not intimately blended with it as in scholasticism. He accepted orthodox religion;
he was not the man to quarrel with the government on such a matter. But while he thought that
reason could show the existence of God, he regarded everything else in theology as known only by
revelation. Indeed he held that the triumph of faith is greatest when to the unaided reason a dogma
appears most absurd. Philosophy, however, should depend only upon reason. He was thus an
advocate of the doctrine of "double truth," that of reason and that of revelation. This doctrine had
been preached by certain Averroists in the thirteenth century, but had been condemned by the
Church. The "triumph of faith" was, for the orthodox, a dangerous device. Bayle, in the late
seventeenth century, made ironical use of it, setting forth at great length all that reason could say
against some orthodox belief, and then concluding "so much the greater is the triumph of faith in
nevertheless believing." How far Bacon's orthodoxy was sincere it is impossible to know. 
-542- 

Bacon was the first of the long line of scientifically minded philosophers who have emphasized
the importance of induction as opposed to deduction. Like most of his successors, he tried to find
some better kind of induction than what is called "induction by simple enumeration." Induction by
simple enumeration may be illustrated by a parable. There was once upon a time a census officer
who had to record the names of all householders in a certain Welsh village. The first that he
questioned was called William Williams; so were the second, third, fourth, . . . At last he said to
himself: "This is tedious; evidently they are all called William Williams. I shall put them down so
and take a holiday." But he was wrong; there was just one whose name was John Jones. This
shows that we may go astray if we trust too implicitly in induction by simple enumeration. 
Bacon believed that he had a method by which induction could be made something better than
this. He wished, for example, to discover the nature of heat, which he supposed (rightly) to consist
of rapid irregular motions of the small parts of bodies. His method was to make lists of hot bodies,
lists of cold bodies, and lists of bodies of varying degrees of heat. He hoped that these lists would
show some characteristic always present in hot bodies and absent in cold bodies, and present in
varying degrees in bodies of different degress of heat. By this method he expected to arrive at
general laws, having, in the first instance, the lowest degree of generality. From a number of such
laws he hoped to reach laws of the second degree of generality, and so on. A suggested law should
be tested by being applied in new circumstances; if it worked in these circumstances it was to that
extent confirmed. Some instances are specially valuable because they enable us to decide between
two theories, each possible so far as previous observations are concerned; such instances are
called "prerogative" instances. 
Bacon not only despised the syllogism, but undervalued mathematics, presumably as insufficiently
experimental. He was virulently hostile to Aristotle, but thought very highly of Democritus.
Although he did not deny that the course of nature exemplifies a Divine purpose, he objected to
any admixture of teleological explanation in the actual investigation of phenomena; everything, he
held, should be explained as following necessarily from efficient causes. 
He valued his method as showing how to arrange the observational 
-543- 

data upon which science must be based. We ought, he says, to be neither like spiders, which spin
things out of their own insides, nor like ants, which merely collect, but like bees, which both
collect and arrange. This is somewhat unfair to the ants, but it illustrates Bacon's meaning. 
One of the most famous parts of Bacon's philosophy is his enumeration of what he calls "idols,"
by which he means bad habits of mind that cause people to fall into error. Of these he enumerates
five kinds. "Idols of the tribe" are those that are inherent in human nature; he mentions in
particular the habit of expecting more order in natural phenomena than is actually to be found.
"Idols of the cave" are personal prejudices, characteristic of the particular investigator. "Idols of
the market-place" are those that have to do with the tyranny of words and the difficulty of
escaping from their influence over our minds. "Idols of the theatre" are those that have to do with
received systems of thought; of these, naturally Aristotle and the scholastics afforded him the
most noteworthy instances. Lastly there are "idols of the schools," which consist in thinking that
some blind rule (such as the syllogism) can take the place of judgement in investigation. 
Although science was what interested Bacon, and although his general outlook was scientific, he
missed most of what was being done in science in his day. He rejected the Copernican theory,
which was excusable so far as Copernicus himself was concerned, since he did not advance any
very solid arguments. But Bacon ought to have been convinced by Kepler, whose New Astronomy
appeared in 1609. Bacon appears not to have known of the work of Vesalius, the pioneer of
modern anatomy, or of Gilbert, whose work on magnetism brilliantly illustrated inductive method.
Still more surprising, he seemed unconscious of the work of Harvey, although Harvey was his
medical attendant. It is true that Harvey did not publish his discovery of the circulation of the
blood until after Bacon's death, but one would have supposed that Bacon would have been aware
of his researches. Harvey had no very high opinion of him, saying "he writes philosophy like a
Lord Chancellor." No doubt Bacon could have done better if he had been less concerned with
worldly success. 
Bacon's inductive method is faulty through insufficient emphasis on hypothesis. He hoped that
mere orderly arrangement of data would make the right hypothesis obvious, but this is seldom the
case. As a 
-544- 
