tradition of many religious movements. I am thinking rather of what is said about war, about
religion and religious toleration, against the wanton killing of animals (there is a most eloquent
passage against hunting), and in favour of a mild criminal law. (The book opens with an argument
against the death penalty for theft.) It must be admitted, however, that life in More's Utopia, as in
most others, would be intolerably dull. Diversity is essential to happiness, and in Utopia there is
hardly any. This is a defect of all planned social systems, actual as well as imaginary. 
CHAPTER V The Reformation and CounterReformation 
THE Reformation and Counter-Reformation, alike, represent the rebellion of less civilized nations
against the intellectual domination of Italy. In the case of the Reformation, the revolt was also
political and theological: the authority of the Pope was rejected, and the tribute which he had
obtained from the power of the keys ceased to be paid. In the case of the Counter-Reformation,
there was only revolt against the intellectual and moral freedom of Renaissance Italy; the power of
the Pope was not diminished, but enhanced, while at the same time it was made clear that his
authority was incompatible with the easy-going laxity of the Borgias and Medici. Roughly
speaking, the Reformation was German, the Counter-Reformation Spanish; the wars of religion
were at the same time wars between Spain and its enemies, coinciding in date with the period
when Spanish power was at its height. 
The attitude of public opinion in northern nations towards Renaissance Italy is illustrated in the
English saying of that time: 
-522- 

An Englishman Italianate Is a devil incarnate 
It will be observed how many of the villains in Shakespeare are Italians. Iago is perhaps the most
prominent instance, but an even more illustrative one is Iachimo in Cymbeline, who leads astray
the virtuous Briton travelling in Italy, and comes to England to practise his wicked wiles upon
unsuspecting natives. Moral indignation against Italians had much to do with the Reformation.
Unfortunately it involved also intellectual repudiation of what Italy had done for civilization. 
The three great men of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation are Luther, Calvin, and Loyola.
All three, intellectually, are medieval in philosophy, as compared either with the Italians who
immediately preceded them, or with such men as Erasmus and More. Philosophically, the century
following the beginning of the Reformation is a barren one. Luther and Calvin reverted to Saint
Augustine, retaining, however, only that part of his teaching which deals with the relation of the
soul to God, not the part which is concerned with the Church. Their theology was such as to
diminish the power of the Church. They abolished purgatory, from which the souls of the dead
could be delivered by masses. They rejected the doctrine of Indulgences, upon which a large part
of the papal revenue depended. By the doctrine of predestination, the fate of the soul after death
was made wholly independent of the actions of priests. These innovations, while they helped in
the struggle with the Pope, prevented the Protestant Churches from becoming as powerful in
Protestant countries as the Catholic Church was in Catholic countries. Protestant divines were (at
least at first) just as bigoted as Catholic theologians, but they had less power, and were therefore
less able to do harm. 
Almost from the very beginning, there was a division among Protestants as to the power of the
State in religious matters. Luther was willing, wherever the prince was Protestant, to recognize
him as head of the Church in his own country. In England, Henry VIII and Elizabeth vigorously
asserted their claims in this respect, and so did the Protestant princes of Germany, Scandinavia,
and (after the revolt from Spain) Holland. This accelerated the already existing tendency to
increase in the power of kings. 
But those Protestants who took seriously the individualistic aspects 
-523- 

of the Reformation were as unwilling to submit to the king as to the Pope. The Anabaptists in
Germany were suppressed, but their doctrine spread to Holland and England. The conflict between
Cromwell and the Long Parliament had many aspects; in its theological aspect, it was in part a
conflict between those who rejected and those who accepted the view that the State should decide
in religious matters. Gradually weariness resulting from the wars of religion led to the growth of
belief in religious toleration, which was one of the sources of the movement which developed into
eighteenth- and nineteenthcentury liberalism. 
Protestant success, at first amazingly rapid, was checked mainly as a resultant of Loyola's creation
of the Jesuit order. Loyola had been a soldier, and his order was founded on military models; there
must be unquestioning obedience to the General, and every Jesuit was to consider himself
engaged in warfare against heresy. As early as the Council of Trent, the Jesuits began to be
influential. They were disciplined, able, completely devoted to the cause, and skilful
propagandists. Their theology was the opposite of that of the Protestants; they rejected those
elements of Saint Augustine's teaching which the Protestants emphasized. They believed in free
will, and opposed predestination. Salvation was not by faith alone, but by both faith and works.
The Jesuits acquired prestige by their missionary zeal, especially in the Far East. They became
popular as confessors, because (if Pascal is to be believed) they were more lenient, except towards
heresy, than other ecclesiastics. They concentrated on education, and thus acquired a firm hold on
the minds of the young. Whenever theology did not interfere, the education they gave was the best
obtainable; we shall see that they taught Descartes more mathematics than he would have learnt
elsewhere. Politically, they were a single united disciplined body, shrinking from no dangers and
no exertions; they urged Catholic princes to practise relentless persecution, and, following in the
wake of conquering Spanish armies, re-established the terror of the Inquisition, even in Italy,
which had had nearly a century of free-thought. 
The results of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation, in the intellectual sphere, were at first
wholly bad, but ultimately beneficial. The Thirty Year's War persuaded everybody that neither
Protestants nor Catholics could be completely victorious; it became necessary 
-524- 
